Prefatory Note To The Meditations. The first edition of the Meditations was published in Latin by Michael
Soly of Paris “at the Sign of the Phoenix” in 1641 cum Privilegio et
Approbatione Doctorum. The Royal “privilege” was indeed given, but
the “approbation” seems to have been of a most indefinite kind. The
reason of the book being published in France and not in Holland, where
Descartes was living in a charming country house at Endegeest near
Leiden, was apparently his fear that the Dutch ministers might in some
way lay hold of it. His friend, Pere Mersenne, took charge of its
publication in Paris and wrote to him about any difficulties that
occurred in the course of its progress through the press. The second
edition was however published at Amsterdam in 1642 by Louis Elzevir,
and this edition was accompanied by the now completed “Objections
and Replies.”1 The edition from which the present translation is made is
the second just mentioned, and is that adopted by MM. Adam and
Tannery as the more correct, for reasons that they state in detail in the
preface to their edition. The work was translated into French by the
Duc de Luynes in 1642 and Descartes considered the translation so
excellent that he had it published some years later. Clerselier, to
complete matters, had the “Objections” also published in French with
the “Replies,” and this, like the other, was subject to Descartes’ revision
1

Published separately. DEAN AND DOCTORS OF THE SACRED
FACULTY OF THEOLOGY IN PARIS. The motive which induces me to present to you this Treatise is so
excellent, and, when you become acquainted with its design, I am
convinced that you will also have so excellent a motive for taking it
under your protection, that I feel that I cannot do better, in order to
render it in some sort acceptable to you, than in a few words to state
what I have set myself to do. I have always considered that the two questions respecting God and
the Soul were the chief of those that ought to be demonstrated by
philosophical rather than theological argument. For although it is quite
enough for us faithful ones to accept by means of faith the fact that the
human soul does not perish with the body, and that God exists, it
certainly does not seem possible ever to persuade infidels of any
religion, indeed, we may almost say, of any moral virtue, unless, to
begin with, we prove these two facts by means of the natural reason. And inasmuch as often in this life greater rewards are offered for vice
than for virtue, few people would prefer the right to the useful, were
they restrained neither by the fear of God nor the expectation of another
life; and although it is absolutely true that we must believe that there is
a God, because we are so taught in the Holy Scriptures, and, on the
other hand, that we must believe the Holy Scriptures because they come
from God (the reason of this is, that, faith being a gift of God, He who
gives the grace to cause us to believe other things can likewise give it to
cause us to believe that He exists), we nevertheless could not place this
argument before infidels, who might accuse us of reasoning in a circle. And, in truth, I have noticed that you, along with all the theologians, did
not only affirm that the existence of God may be proved by the natural
reason, but also that it may be inferred from the Holy Scriptures, that
knowledge about Him is much clearer than that which we have of many
created things, and, as a matter of fact, is so easy to acquire, that those

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

who have it not are culpable in their ignorance. This indeed appears
from the Wisdom of Solomon, chapter xiii., where it is said “How be it
they are not to be excused; for if their understanding was so great that
they could discern the world and the creatures, why did they not rather
find out the Lord thereof?” and in Romans, chapter i., it is said that
they are “without excuse”; and again in the same place, by these words
“that which may be known of God is manifest in them,” it seems as
through we were shown that all that which can be known of God may
be made manifest by means which are not derived from anywhere but
from ourselves, and from the simple consideration of the nature of our
minds. Hence I thought it not beside my purpose to inquire how this is
so, and how God may be more easily and certainly known than the
things of the world. And as regards the soul, although many have considered that it is
not easy to know its nature, and some have even dared to say that
human reasons have convinced us that it would perish with the body,
and that faith alone could believe the contrary, nevertheless, inasmuch
as the Lateran Council held under Leo X (in the eighth session)
condemns these tenets, and as Leo expressly ordains Christian
philosophers to refute their arguments and to employ all their powers in
making known the truth, I have ventured in this treatise to undertake the
same task. More than that, I am aware that the principal reason which causes
many impious persons not to desire to believe that there is a God, and
that the human soul is distinct from the body, is that they declare that
hitherto no one has been able to demonstrate these two facts; and
although I am not of their opinion but, on the contrary, hold that the
greater part of the reasons which have been brought forward concerning
these two questions by so many great men are, when they are rightly
understood, equal to so many demonstrations, and that it is almost
impossible to invent new ones, it is yet in my opinion the case that
nothing more useful can be accomplished in philosophy than once for
all to seek with care for the best of these reasons, and to set them forth
in so clear and exact a manner, that it will henceforth be evident to
everybody that they are veritable demonstrations. And, finally,
inasmuch as it was desired that I should undertake this task by many
who were aware that I had cultivated a certain Method for the
resolution of difficulties of every kind in the Sciences—a method which
it is true is not novel, since there is nothing more ancient than the truth,
but of which they were aware that I had made use successfully enough
in other matters of difficulty—I have thought that it was my duty also to

make trial of it in the present matter. Now all that I could accomplish in the matter is contained in this
Treatise. Not that I have here drawn together all the different reasons
which might be brought forward to serve as proofs of this subject: for
that never seemed to be necessary excepting when there was no one
single proof that was certain. But I have treated the first and principal
ones in such a manner that I can venture to bring them forward as very
evident and very certain demonstrations. And more than that, I will say
that these proofs are such that I do not think that there is any way open
to the human mind by which it can ever succeed in discovering better. For the importance of the subject, and the glory of God to which all this
relates, constrain me to speak here somewhat more freely of myself than
is my habit. Nevertheless, whatever certainty and evidence I find in my
reasons, I cannot persuade myself that all the world is capable of
understanding them. Still, just as in Geometry there are many
demonstrations that have been left to us by Archimedes, by Apollonius,
by Pappus, and others, which are accepted by everyone as perfectly
certain and evident (because they clearly contain nothing which,
considered by itself, is not very easy to understand, and as all through
that which follows has an exact connection with, and dependence on
that which precedes), nevertheless, because they are somewhat lengthy,
and demand a mind wholly devoted tot heir consideration, they are only
taken in and understood by a very limited number of persons. Similarly, although I judge that those of which I here make use are
equal to, or even surpass in certainty and evidence, the demonstrations
of Geometry, I yet apprehend that they cannot be adequately understood
by many, both because they are also a little lengthy and dependent the
one on the other, and principally because they demand a mind wholly
free of prejudices, and one which can be easily detached from the
affairs of the senses. And, truth to say, there are not so many in the
world who are fitted for metaphysical speculations as there are for those
of Geometry. And more than that; there is still this difference, that in
Geometry, since each one is persuaded that nothing must be advanced
of which there is not a certain demonstration, those who are not entirely
adepts more frequently err in approving what is false, in order to give
the impression that they understand it, than in refuting the true. But the
case is different in philosophy where everyone believes that all is
problematical, and few give themselves to the search after truth; and the
greater number, in their desire to acquire a reputation for boldness of

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

thought, arrogantly combat the most important of truths2. That is why, whatever force there may be in my reasonings, seeing
they belong to philosophy, I cannot hope that they will have much
effect on the minds of men, unless you extend to them your protection. But the estimation in which your Company is universally held is so
great, and the name of SORBONNE carries with it so much authority, that,
next to the Sacred Councils, never has such deference been paid to the
judgment of any Body, not only in what concerns the faith, but also in
what regards human philosophy as well: everyone indeed believes that
it is not possible to discover elsewhere more perspicacity and solidity,
or more integrity and wisdom in pronouncing judgment. For this reason
I have no doubt that if you deign to take the trouble in the first place of
correcting this work (for being conscious not only of my infirmity, but
also of my ignorance, I should not dare to state that it was free from
errors), and then, after adding to it these things that are lacking to it,
completing those which are imperfect, and yourselves taking the trouble
to give a more ample explanation of those things which have need of it,
or at least making me aware of the defects so that I may apply myself to
remedy them;3 when this is done and when finally the reasonings by
which I prove that there is a God, and that the human soul differs from
the body, shall be carried to that point of perspicuity to which I am sure
they can be carried in order that they may be esteemed as perfectly
exact demonstrations, if you deign to authorize your approbation and to
render public testimony to their truth and certainty, I do not doubt, I
say, that henceforward all the errors and false opinions which have ever
existed regarding these two questions will soon be effaced from the
minds of men. For the truth itself will easily cause all men of mind and
learning to subscribe to your judgment; and your authority will cause
the atheists, who are usually more arrogant than learned or judicious, to
rid themselves of their spirit of contradiction or lead them possibly
themselves to defend the reasonings which they find being received as
demonstrations by all persons of consideration, lest they appear not to
understand them. And, finally, all others will easily yield to such a
mass of evidence, and there will be none who dares to doubt the
existence of God and the real and true distinction between the human
soul and the body. It is for you now in your singular wisdom to judge
of the importance of the establishment of such beliefs [you who see the

disorders produced by the doubt of them]4 . But it would not become
me to say more in consideration of the cause of God and religion to
those who have always been the most worthy supports of the Catholic
Church. 2
3

4

The French version is followed here. The French version is followed here. Preface to the Reader. I have already slightly touched on these two questions of God and the
human soul in the Discourse on the Method of rightly conducting the
Reason and seeking truth in the Sciences, published in French in the
year 1637. Not that I had the design of treating these with any
thoroughness, but only so to speak in passing, and in order to ascertain
by the judgment of the readers how I should treat them later on. For
these questions have always appeared to me to be of such importance
that I judged it suitable to speak of them more than once; and the road
which I follow in the explanation of them is so little trodden, and so far
removed from the ordinary path, that I did not judge it to be expedient
to set it forth at length in French and in a Discourse which might be
read by everyone, in case the feebler minds should believe that it was
permitted to them to attempt to follow the same path. But, having in this Discourse on Method begged all those who have
found in my writings somewhat deserving of censure to do me the
favour of acquainting me with the grounds of it, nothing worthy of
remark has been objected to in them beyond two matters: to these two I
wish here to reply in a few words before undertaking their more
detailed discussion. The first objection is that it does not follow from the fact that the
human mind reflecting on itself does not perceive itself to be other than
a thing that thinks, that its nature or its essence consists only in its being
a thing that thinks, in the sense that this word only excludes all other
things which might also be supposed to pertain to the nature of the soul. To this objection I reply that it was not my intention in that place to
exclude these in accordance with the order that looks to the truth of the
matter (as to which I was not then dealing), but only in accordance with
the order of my thought [perception]; thus my meaning was that so far
as I was aware, I knew nothing clearly as belonging to my essence,
excepting that I was a thing that thinks, or a thing that has in itself the
When it is thought desirable to insert additional readings from the French
version this will be indicated by the use of square brackets. 1-4

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

faculty of thinking. But I shall show hereafter how from the fact that I
know no other thing which pertains to my essence, it follows that there
is no other thing which really does belong to it. The second objection is that it does not follow from the fact that I
have in myself the idea of something more perfect than I am, that this
idea is more perfect than I, and much less that what is represented by
this idea exists. But I reply that in this term idea there is here
something equivocal, for it may either be taken materially, as an act of
my understanding, and in this sense it cannot be said that it is more
perfect than I; or it may be taken objectively, as the thing which is
represented by this act, which, although we do not suppose it to exist
outside of my understanding, may, none the less, be more perfect than I,
because of its essence. And in following out this Treatise I shall show
more fully how, from the sole fact that I have in myself the idea of a
thing more perfect than myself, it follows that this thing truly exists. In addition to these two objections I have also seen two fairly
lengthy works on this subject, which, however, did not so much impugn
my reasonings as my conclusions, and this by arguments drawn from
the ordinary atheistic sources. But, because such arguments cannot
make any impression on the minds of those who really understand my
reasonings, and as the judgments of many are so feeble and irrational
that they very often allow themselves to be persuaded by the opinions
which they have first formed, however false and far removed from
reason they may be, rather than by a true and solid but subsequently
received refutation of these opinions, I do not desire to reply here to
their criticisms in case of being first of all obliged to state them. I shall
only say in general that all that is said by the atheist against the
existence of God, always depends either on the fact that we ascribe to
God affections which are human, or that we attribute so much strength
and wisdom to our minds that we even have the presumption to desire
to determine and understand that which God can and ought to do. In
this way all that they allege will cause us no difficulty, provided only
we remember that we must consider our minds as things which are
finite and limited, and God as a Being who is incomprehensible and
infinite. Now that I have once for all recognized and acknowledged the
opinions of men, I at once begin to treat of God and the Human soul,
and at the same time to treat of the whole of the First Philosophy,
without however expecting any praise from the vulgar and without the
hope that my book will have many readers. On the contrary, I should
never advise anyone to read it excepting those who desire to meditate

seriously with me, and who can detach their minds from affairs of
sense, and deliver themselves entirely from every sort of prejudice. I
know too well that such men exist in a very small number. But for
those who, without caring to comprehend the order and connections of
my reasonings, form their criticisms on detached portions arbitrarily
selected, as is the custom with many, these, I say, will not obtain much
profit from reading this Treatise. And although they perhaps in several
parts find occasion of cavilling, they can for all their pains make no
objection which is urgent or deserving of reply. And inasmuch as I make no promise to others to satisfy them at
once, and as I do not presume so much on my own powers as to believe
myself capable of foreseeing all that can cause difficulty to anyone, I
shall first of all set forth in these Meditations the very considerations by
which I persuade myself that I have reached a certain and evident
knowledge of the truth, in order to see if, by the same reasons which
persuaded me, I can also persuade others. And, after that, I shall reply
to the objections which have been made to me by persons of genius and
learning to whom I have sent my Meditations for examination, before
submitting them to the press. For they have made so many objections
and these so different, that I venture to promise that it will be difficult
for anyone to bring to mind criticisms of any consequence which have
not been already touched upon. This is why I beg those who read these
Meditations to form no judgment upon them unless they have given
themselves the trouble to read all the objections as well as the replies
which I have made to them.5

Synopsis of the Six Following Meditations. In the first Meditation I set forth the reasons for which we may,
generally speaking, doubt about all things and especially about material
things, at least so long as we have no other foundations for the sciences
than those which we have hitherto possessed. But although the utility
of a Doubt which is so general does not at first appear, it is at the same
time very great, inasmuch as it delivers us from every kind of prejudice,
and sets out for us a very simple way by which the mind may detach
5

Between the Praefatio ad Lectorem and the Synopsis, the Paris Edition (1st
Edition) interpolates an Index which is not found in the Amsterdam Edition
(2nd Edition). Since Descartes did not reproduce it, he was doubtless not
its author. Mersenne probably composed it himself, adjusting it to the
paging of the first Edition. (Note in Adam and Tannery’s Edition.) 4

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

itself from the senses; and finally it makes it impossible for us ever to
doubt those things which we have once discovered to be true. In the second Meditation, mind, which making use of the liberty
which pertains to it, takes for granted that all those things of whose
existence it has the least doubt, are non-existent, recognizes that it is
however absolutely impossible that it does not itself exist. This point is
likewise of the greatest moment, inasmuch as by this means a
distinction is easily drawn between the things which pertain to mind—
that is to say to the intellectual nature—and those which pertain to
body. But because it may be that some expect from me in this place a
statement of the reasons establishing the immortality of the soul, I feel
that I should here make known to them that having aimed at writing
nothing in all this Treatise of which I do not possess very exact
demonstrations, I am obliged to follow a similar order to that made use
of by the geometers, which is to begin by putting forward as premises
all those things upon which the proposition that we seek depends,
before coming to any conclusion regarding it. Now the first and
principal matter which is requisite for thoroughly understanding the
immortality of the soul is to form the clearest possible conception of it,
and one which will be entirely distinct from all the conceptions which
we may have of body; and in this Meditation this has been done. In
addition to this it is requisite that we may be assured that all the things
which we conceive clearly and distinctly are true in the very way in
which we think them; and this could not be proved previously to the
Fourth Mediation. Further we must have a distinct conception of
corporeal nature, which is given partly in this Second, and partly in the
Fifth and Sixth Meditations. And finally we should conclude from all
this, that those things which we conceive clearly and distinctly as being
diverse substances, as we regard mind and body to be, are really
substances essentially distinct one from the other; and this is the
conclusion of the Sixth Meditation. This is further confirmed in this
same Meditation by the fact that we cannot conceive of body excepting
in so far as it is divisible, while the mind cannot be conceived of
excepting as indivisible. For we are not able to conceive of the half of a
mind as we can do of the smallest of all bodies; so that we see that not
only are their natures different but even in some respects contrary to
one another. I have not however dealt further with this matter in this
treatise, both because what I have said is sufficient to show clearly
enough that the extinction of the mind does not follow from the
corruption of the body, and also to give men the hope of another life

after death, as also because the premises from which the immortality of
the soul may be deduced depend on an elucidation of a complete system
of Physics. This would mean to establish in the first place that all
substances generally—that is to say all things which cannot exist
without being created by God—are in their nature incorruptible, and
that they can never cease to exist unless God, in denying to them his
concurrence, reduce them to nought; and secondly that body, regarded
generally, is a substance, which is the reason why it also cannot perish,
but that the human body, inasmuch as it differs from other bodies, is
composed only of a certain configuration of members and of other
similar accidents, while the human mind is not similarly composed of
any accidents, but is a pure substance. For although all the accidents of
mind be changed, although, for instance, it think certain things, will
others, perceive others, etc., despite all this it does not emerge from
these changes another mind: the human body on the other hand
becomes a different thing from the sole fact that the figure or form of
any of its portions is found to be changed. From this it follows that the
human body may indeed easily enough perish, but the mind [or soul of
man (I make no distinction between them)] is owing to its nature
immortal. In the third Meditation it seems to me that I have explained at
sufficient length the principal argument of which I make use in order to
prove the existence of God. But none the less, because I did not wish in
that place to make use of any comparisons derived from corporeal
things, so as to withdraw as much as I could the minds of readers from
the senses, there may perhaps have remained many obscurities which,
however, will, I hope, be entirely removed by the Replies which I have
made to the Objections which have been set before me. Amongst
others there is, for example, this one, “How the idea in us of a being
supremely perfect possesses so much objective reality [that is to say
participates by representation in so many degrees of being and
perfection] that it necessarily proceeds from a cause which is absolutely
perfect.” This is illustrated in these Replies by the comparison of a
very perfect machine, the idea of which is found in the mind of some
workman. For as the objective contrivance of this idea must have some
cause, i.e. either the science of the workman or that of some other from
whom he has received the idea, it is similarly impossible that the idea of
God which is in us should not have God himself as its cause. In the fourth Meditation it is shown that all these things which we
very clearly and distinctly perceive are true, and at the same time it is
explained in what the nature of error or falsity consists. This must of

necessity be known both for the confirmation of the preceding truths
and for the better comprehension of those that follow. (But it must
meanwhile be remarked that I do not in any way there treat of sin--that
is to say, of the error which is committed in the pursuit of good and
evil, but only of that which arises in the deciding between the true and
the false. And I do not intend to speak of matters pertaining to the Faith
or the conduct of life, but only of those which concern speculative
truths, and which may be known by the sole aid of the light of nature.) In the fifth Meditation corporeal nature generally is explained, and
in addition to this the existence of God is demonstrated by a new proof
in which there may possibly be certain difficulties also, but the solution
of these will be seen in the Replies to the Objections. And further I
show in what sense it is true to say that the certainty of geometrical
demonstrations is itself dependent on the knowledge of God. Finally in the Sixth I distinguish the action of the understanding6
from that of the imagination;7 the marks by which this distinction is
made are described. I here show that the mind of man is really distinct
from the body, and at the same time that the two are so closely joined
together that they form, so to speak, a single thing. All the errors which
proceed from the senses are then surveyed, while the means of avoiding
them are demonstrated, and finally all the reasons from which we may
deduce the existence of material things are set forth. Not that I judge
them to be very useful in establishing that which they prove, to wit, that
there is in truth a world, that men possess bodies, and other such things
which never have been doubted by anyone of sense; but because in
considering these closely we come to see that they are neither so strong
nor so evident as those arguments which lead us to the knowledge of
our mind and of God; so that these last must be the most certain and
most evident facts which can fall within the cognizance of the human
mind. And this is the whole matter that I have tried to prove in these
Meditations, for which reason I here omit to speak of many other
questions which I dealt incidentally in this discussion. MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

MEDITATIONS ON THE FIRST PHILOSOPHY
IN WHICH THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
AND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN MIND
AND BODY ARE DEMONSTRATED.8
Meditation I. Of the things which may be brought within the sphere
of the doubtful. It is now some years since I detected how many were the false
beliefs that I had from my earliest youth admitted as true, and how
doubtful was everything I had since constructed on this basis; and from
that time I was convinced that I must once for all seriously undertake to
rid myself of all the opinions which I had formerly accepted, and
commence to build anew from the foundation, if I wanted to establish
any firm and permanent structure in the sciences. But as this enterprise
appeared to be a very great one, I waited until I had attained an age so
mature that I could not hope that at any later date I should be better
fitted to execute my design. This reason caused me to delay so long
that I should feel that I was doing wrong were I to occupy in
deliberation the time that yet remains to me for action. To-day, then,
since very opportunely for the plan I have in view I have delivered my
mind from every care [and am happily agitated by no passions] and
since I have procured for myself an assured leisure in a peaceable
retirement, I shall at last seriously and freely address myself to the
general upheaval of all my former opinions. Now for this object it is not necessary that I should show that all of
these are false—I shall perhaps never arrive at this end. But inasmuch
as reason already persuades me that I ought no less carefully to
withhold my assent from matters which are not entirely certain and
indubitable than from those which appear to me manifestly to be false,
if I am able to find in each one some reason to doubt, this will suffice to
justify my rejecting the whole. And for that end it will not be requisite
that I should examine each in particular, which would be an endless
undertaking; for owing to the fact that the destruction of the foundations
8

6
7

intellectio. imaginatio. 1-6

In place of this long title at the head of the page the first Edition had
immediately after the Synopsis, and on the same page 7, simply “First
Meditation.” (Adam’s Edition.) 6

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

of necessity brings with it the downfall of the rest of the edifice, I shall
only in the first place attack those principles upon which all my former
opinions rested. All that up to the present time I have accepted as most true and
certain I have learned either from the senses or through the senses; but
it is sometimes proved to me that these senses are deceptive, and it is
wiser not to trust entirely to anything by which we have once been
deceived. But it may be that although the senses sometimes deceive us
concerning things which are hardly perceptible, or very far away, there
are yet many others to be met with as to which we cannot reasonably
have any doubt, although we recognize them by their means. For
example, there is the fact that I am here, seated by the fire, attired in a
dressing gown, having this paper in my hands and other similar matters. And how could I deny that these hands and this body are mine, were it
not perhaps that I compare myself to certain persons, devoid of sense,
whose cerebella are so troubled and clouded by the violent vapours of
black bile, that they constantly assure us that they think they are kings
when they are really quite poor, or that they are clothed in purple when
they are really without covering, or who imagine that they have an
earthenware head or are nothing but pumpkins or are made of glass. But they are mad, and I should not be any the less insane were I to
follow examples so extravagant. At the same time I must remember that I am a man, and that
consequently I am in the habit of sleeping, and in my dreams
representing to myself the same things or sometimes even less probable
things, than do those who are insane in their waking moments. How
often has it happened to me that in the night I dreamt that I found
myself in this particular place, that I was dressed and seated near the
fire, whilst in reality I was lying undressed in bed! At this moment it
does indeed seem to me that it is with eyes awake that I am looking at
this paper; that this head which I move is not asleep, that it is
deliberately and of set purpose that I extend my hand and perceive it;
what happens in sleep does not appear so clear nor so distinct as does
all this. But in thinking over this I remind myself that on many
occasions I have in sleep been deceived by similar illusions, and in
dwelling carefully on this reflection I see so manifestly that there are no
certain indications by which we may clearly distinguish wakefulness
from sleep that I am lost in astonishment. And my astonishment is such
that it is almost capable of persuading me that I now dream. Now let us assume that we are asleep and that all these particulars,

e.g. that we open our eyes, shake our head, extend our hands, and so on,
are but false delusions; and let us reflect that possibly neither our hands
nor our whole body are such as they appear to us to be. At the same
time we must at least confess that the things which are represented to us
in sleep are like painted representations which can only have been
formed as the counterparts of something real and true, and that in this
way those general things at least, i.e. eyes, a head, hands, and a whole
body, are not imaginary things, but things really existent. For, as a
matter of fact, painters, even when they study with the greatest skill to
represent sirens and satyrs by forms the most strange and extraordinary,
cannot give them natures which are entirely new, but merely make a
certain medley of the members of different animals; or if their
imagination is extravagant enough to invent something so novel that
nothing similar has ever before been seen, and that then their work
represents a thing purely fictitious and absolutely false, it is certain all
the same that the colours of which this is composed are necessarily
real. And for the same reason, although these general things, to wit, [a
body], eyes, a head, hands, and such like, may be imaginary, we are
bound at the same time to confess that there are at least some other
objects yet more simple and more universal, which are real and true;
and of these just in the same way as with certain real colours, all these
images of things which dwell in our thoughts, whether true and real or
false and fantastic, are formed. To such a class of things pertains corporeal nature in general, and
its extension, the figure of extended things, their quantity or magnitude
and number, as also the place in which they are, the time which
measures their duration, and so on. That is possibly why our reasoning is not unjust when we conclude
from this that Physics, Astronomy, Medicine and all other sciences
which have as their end the consideration of composite things, are very
dubious and uncertain; but that Arithmetic, Geometry and other
sciences of that kind which only treat of things that are very simple and
very general, without taking great trouble to ascertain whether they are
actually existent or not, contain some measure of certainty and an
element of the indubitable. For whether I am awake or asleep, two and
three together always form five, and the square can never have more
than four sides, and it does not seem possible that truths so clear and
apparent can be suspected of any falsity [or uncertainty]. Nevertheless I have long had fixed in my mind the belief that an
all-powerful God existed by whom I have been created such as I am. But how do I know that He has not brought it to pass that there is no

1-8

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

earth, no heaven, no extended body, no magnitude, no place, and that
nevertheless [I possess the perceptions of all these things and that] they
seem to me to exist just exactly as I now see them? And, besides, as I
sometimes imagine that others deceive themselves in the things which
they think they know best, how do I know that I am not deceived every
time that I add two and three, or count the sides of a square, or judge of
things yet simpler, if anything simpler can be imagined? But possibly
God has not desired that I should be thus deceived, for He is said to be
supremely good. If, however, it is contrary to His goodness to have
made me such that I constantly deceive myself, it would also appear to
be contrary to His goodness to permit me to be sometimes deceived,
and nevertheless I cannot doubt that He does permit this. There may indeed be those who would prefer to deny the existence
of a God so powerful, rather than believe that all other things are
uncertain. But let us not oppose them for the present, and grant that all
that is here said of a God is a fable; nevertheless in whatever way they
suppose that I have arrived at the state of being that I have reached—
whether they attribute it to fate or to accident, or make out that it is by a
continual succession of antecedents, or by some other method—since to
err and deceive oneself is a defect, it is clear that the greater will be the
probability of my being so imperfect as to deceive myself ever, as is the
Author to whom they assign my origin the less powerful. To these
reasons I have certainly nothing to reply, but at the end I feel
constrained to confess that there is nothing in all that I formerly
believed to be true, of which I cannot in some measure doubt, and that
not merely through want of thought or through levity, but for reasons
which are very powerful and maturely considered; so that henceforth I
ought not the less carefully to refrain from giving credence to these
opinions than to that which is manifestly false, if I desire to arrive at
any certainty [in the sciences]. But it is not sufficient to have made these remarks, we must also be
careful to keep them in mind. For these ancient and commonly held
opinions still revert frequently to my mind, long and familiar custom
having given them the right to occupy my mind against my inclination
and rendered them almost masters of my belief; nor will I ever lose the
habit of deferring to them or of placing my confidence in them, so long
as I consider them as they really are, i.e. opinions in some measure
doubtful, as I have just shown, and at the same time highly probable, so
that there is much more reason to believe in than to deny them. That is
why I consider that I shall not be acting amiss, if, taking of set purpose
a contrary belief, I allow myself to be deceived, and for a certain time

pretend that all these opinions are entirely false and imaginary, until at
last, having thus balanced my former prejudices with my latter [so that
they cannot divert my opinions more to one side than to the other], my
judgment will no longer be dominated by bad usage or turned away
from the right knowledge of the truth. For I am assured that there can
be neither peril nor error in this course, and that I cannot at present
yield too much to distrust, since I am not considering the question of
action, but only of knowledge. I shall then suppose, not that God who is supremely good and the
fountain of truth, but some evil genius not less powerful than deceitful,
has employed his whole energies in deceiving me; I shall consider that
the heavens, the earth, colours, figures, sound, and all other external
things are nought but the illusions and dreams of which this genius has
availed himself in order to lay traps for my credulity; I shall consider
myself as having no hands, no eyes, no flesh, no blood, nor any senses,
yet falsely believing myself to possess all these things; I shall remain
obstinately attached to this idea, and if by this means it is not in my
power to arrive at the knowledge of any truth, I may at least do what is
in my power [i.e. suspend my judgment], and with firm purpose avoid
giving credence to any false thing, or being imposed upon by this arch
deceiver, however powerful and deceptive he may be. But this task is a
laborious one, and insensibly a certain lassitude leads me into the
course of my ordinary life. And just as a captive who in sleep enjoys an
imaginary liberty, when he begins to suspect that his liberty is but a
dream, fears to awaken, and conspires with these agreeable illusions
that the deception may be prolonged, so insensibly of my own accord I
fall back into my former opinions, and I dread awakening from this
slumber, lest the laborious wakefulness which would follow the
tranquillity of this repose should have to be spent not in daylight, but in
the excessive darkness of the difficulties which have just been
discussed. Meditation II Of the Nature of the Human Mind; and that it is more
easily known than the Body. The Meditation of yesterday filled my mind with so many doubts
that it is no longer in my power to forget them. And yet I do not see in
what manner I can resolve them; and, just as if I had all of a sudden
fallen into very deep water, I am so disconcerted that I can neither make
8

1-9

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

certain of setting my feet on the bottom, nor can I swim and so support
myself on the surface. I shall nevertheless make an effort and follow
anew the same path as that on which I yesterday entered, i.e. I shall
proceed by setting aside all that in which the least doubt could be
supposed to exist, just as if I had discovered that it was absolutely false;
and I shall ever follow in this road until I have met with something
which is certain, or at least, if I can do nothing else, until I have learned
for certain that there is nothing in the world that is certain. Archimedes,
in order that he might draw the terrestrial globe out of its place, and
transport it elsewhere, demanded only that one point should be fixed
and immoveable; in the same way I shall have the right to conceive high
hopes if I am happy enough to discover one thing only which is certain
and indubitable. I suppose, then, that all the things that I see are false; I persuade
myself that nothing has ever existed of all that my fallacious memory
represents to me. I consider that I possess no senses; I imagine that
body, figure, extension, movement and place are but the fictions of my
mind. What, then, can be esteemed as true? Perhaps nothing at all,
unless that there is nothing in the world that is certain. But how can I know there is not something different from those
things that I have just considered, of which one cannot have the
slightest doubt? Is there not some God, or some other being by
whatever name we call it, who puts these reflections into my mind? That is not necessary, for is it not possible that I am capable of
producing them myself? I myself, am I not at least something? But I
have already denied that I had senses and body. Yet I hesitate, for what
follows from that? Am I so dependent on body and senses that I cannot
exist without these? But I was persuaded that there was nothing in all
the world, that there was no heaven, no earth, that there were no minds,
nor any bodies: was I not then likewise persuaded that I did not exist? Not at all; of a surety I myself did exist since I persuaded myself of
something [or merely because I thought of something]. But there is
some deceiver or other, very powerful and very cunning, who ever
employs his ingenuity in deceiving me. Then without doubt I exist also
if he deceives me, and let him deceive me as much as he will, he can
never cause me to be nothing so long as I think that I am something. So
that after having reflected well and carefully examined all things, we
must come to the definite conclusion that this proposition: I am, I exist,
is necessarily true each time that I pronounce it, or that I mentally
conceive it. But I do not yet know clearly enough what I am, I who am certain

that I am; and hence I must be careful to see that I do not imprudently
take some other object in place of myself, and thus that I do not go
astray in respect of this knowledge that I hold to be the most certain and
most evident of all that I have formerly learned. That is why I shall
now consider anew what I believed myself to be before I embarked
upon these last reflections; and of my former opinions I shall withdraw
all that might even in a small degree be invalidated by the reasons
which I have just brought forward, in order that there may be nothing at
all left beyond what is absolutely certain and indubitable. What then did I formerly believe myself to be? Undoubtedly I
believed myself to be a man. But what is a man? Shall I say a
reasonable animal? Certainly not; for then I should have to inquire
what an animal is, and what is reasonable; and thus from a single
question I should insensibly fall into an infinitude of others more
difficult; and I should not wish to waste the little time and leisure
remaining to me in trying to unravel subtleties like these. But I shall
rather stop here to consider the thoughts which of themselves spring up
in my mind, and which were not inspired by anything beyond my own
nature alone when I applied myself to the consideration of my being. In
the first place, then, I considered myself as having a face, hands, arms,
and all that system of members composed on bones and flesh as seen in
a corpse which I designated by the name of body. In addition to this I
considered that I was nourished, that I walked, that I felt, and that I
thought, and I referred all these actions to the soul: but I did not stop to
consider what the soul was, or if I did stop, I imagined that it was
something extremely rare and subtle like a wind, a flame, or an ether,
which was spread throughout my grosser parts. As to body I had no
manner of doubt about its nature, but thought I had a very clear
knowledge of it; and if I had desired to explain it according to the
notions that I had then formed of it, I should have described it thus: By
the body I understand all that which can be defined by a certain figure:
something which can be confined in a certain place, and which can fill a
given space in such a way that every other body will be excluded from
it; which can be perceived either by touch, or by sight, or by hearing, or
by taste, or by smell: which can be moved in many ways not, in truth,
by itself, but by something which is foreign to it, by which it is touched
[and from which it receives impressions]: for to have the power of selfmovement, as also of feeling or of thinking, I did not consider to
appertain to the nature of body: on the contrary, I was rather astonished
to find that faculties similar to them existed in some bodies. But what am I, now that I suppose that there is a certain genius

1-10

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

which is extremely powerful, and, if I may say so, malicious, who
employs all his powers in deceiving me? Can I affirm that I possess the
least of all those things which I have just said pertain to the nature of
body? I pause to consider, I revolve all these things in my mind, and I
find none of which I can say that it pertains to me. It would be tedious
to stop to enumerate them. Let us pass to the attributes of soul and see
if there is any one which is in me? What of nutrition or walking [the
first mentioned]? But if it is so that I have no body it is also true that I
can neither walk nor take nourishment. Another attribute is sensation. But one cannot feel without body, and besides I have thought I
perceived many things during sleep that I recognized in my waking
moments as not having been experienced at all. What of thinking? I
find here that thought is an attribute that belongs to me; it alone cannot
be separated from me. I am, I exist, that is certain. But how often? Just when I think; for it might possibly be the case if I ceased entirely to
think, that I should likewise cease altogether to exist. I do not now
admit anything which is not necessarily true: to speak accurately I am
not more than a thing which thinks, that is to say a mind or a soul, or an
understanding, or a reason, which are terms whose significance was
formerly unknown to me. I am, however, a real thing and really exist;
but what thing? I have answered: a thing which thinks. And what more? I shall exercise my imagination [in order to see if
I am not something more]. I am not a collection of members which we
call the human body: I am not a subtle air distributed through these
members, I am not a wind, a fire, a vapour, a breath, nor anything at all
which I can imagine or conceive; because I have assumed that all these
were nothing. Without changing that supposition I find that I only
leave myself certain of the fact that I am somewhat. But perhaps it is
true that these same things which I supposed were non-existent because
they are unknown to me, are really not different from the self which I
know. I am not sure about this, I shall not dispute about it now; I can
only give judgment on things that are known to me. I know that I exist,
and I inquire what I am, I whom I know to exist. But it is very certain
that the knowledge of my existence taken in its precise significance
does not depend on things whose existence is not yet known to me;
consequently it does not depend on those which I can feign in
imagination. And indeed the very term feign in imagination9 proves to
me my error, for I really do this if I image myself a something, since to
imagine is nothing else than to contemplate the figure or image of a

corporeal thing. But I already know for certain that I am, and that it
may be that all these images, and, speaking generally, all things that
relate to the nature of body are nothing but dreams [and chimeras]. For
this reason I see clearly that I have as little reason to say, “I shall
stimulate my imagination in order to know more distinctly what I am,”
than if I were to say, “I am now awake, and I perceive somewhat that is
real and true: but because I do not yet perceive it distinctly enough, I
shall go to sleep of express purpose, so that my dreams may represent
the perception with greatest truth and evidence.” And, thus, I know for
certain that nothing of all that I can understand by means of my
imagination belongs to this knowledge which I have of myself, and that
it is necessary to recall the mind from this mode of thought with the
utmost diligence in order that it may be able to know its own nature
with perfect distinctness. But what then am I? A thing which thinks. What is a thing which
thinks? It is a thing which doubts, understands, [conceives], affirms,
denies, wills, refuses, which also imagines and feels. Certainly it is no small matter if all these things pertain to my
nature. But why should they not so pertain? Am I not that being who
now doubts nearly everything, who nevertheless understands certain
things, who affirms that one only is true, who denies all the others, who
desires to know more, is averse from being deceived, who imagines
many things, sometimes indeed despite his will, and who perceives
many likewise, as by the intervention of the bodily organs? Is there
nothing in all this which is as true as it is certain that I exist, even
though I should always sleep and though he who has given me being
employed all his ingenuity in deceiving me? Is there likewise any one
of these attributes which can be distinguished from my thought, or
which might be said to be separated from myself? For it is so evident
of itself that it is I who doubts, who understands, and who desires, that
there is no reason here to add anything to explain it. And I have
certainly the power of imagining likewise; for although it may happen
(as I formerly supposed) that none of the things which I imagine are
true, nevertheless this power of imagining does not cease to be really in
use, and it forms part of my thought. Finally, I am the same who feels,
that is to say, who perceives certain things, as by the organs of sense,
since in truth I see light, I hear noise, I feel heat. But it will be said that
these phenomena are false and that I am dreaming. Let it be so; still it
is at least quite certain that it seems to me that I see light, that I hear
noise and that I feel heat. That cannot be false; properly speaking it is

9

Or “form an image” (effingo). 10

1-11

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

what is in me called feeling;10 and used in this precise sense that is no
other thing than thinking. From this time I begin to know what I am with a little more
clearness and distinction than before; but nevertheless it still seems to
me, and I cannot prevent myself from thinking, that corporeal things,
whose images are framed by thought, which are tested by the senses, are
much more distinctly known than that obscure part of me which does
not come under the imagination. Although really it is very strange to
say that I know and understand more distinctly these things whose
existence seems to me dubious, which are unknown to me, and which
do not belong to me, than others of the truth of which I am convinced,
which are known to me and which pertain to my real nature, in a word,
than myself. But I see clearly how the case stands: my mind loves to
wander, and cannot yet suffer itself to be retained within the just limits
of truth. Very good, let us once more give it the freest rein, so that,
when afterwards we seize the proper occasion for pulling up, it may the
more easily be regulated and controlled. Let us begin by considering the commonest matters, those which
we believe to be the most distinctly comprehended, to wit, the bodies
which we touch and see; not indeed bodies in general, for these general
ideas are usually a little more confused, but let us consider one body in
particular. Let us take, for example, this piece of wax: it has been
taken quite freshly from the hive, and it has not yet lost the sweetness of
the honey which it contains; it still retains somewhat of the odour of the
flowers from which it has been culled; its colour, its figure, its size are
apparent; it is hard, cold, easily handled, and if you strike it with the
finger, it will emit a sound. Finally all the things which are requisite to
cause us distinctly to recognize a body, are met with in it. But notice
that while I speak and approach the fire what remained of the taste is
exhaled, the smell evaporates, the colour alters, the figure is destroyed,
the size increases, it becomes liquid, it heats, scarcely can one handle it,
and when one strikes it, no sound is emitted. Does the same wax
remain after this change? We must confess that it remains; none would
judge otherwise. What then did I know so distinctly in this piece of
wax? It could certainly be nothing of all that the senses brought to my
notice, since all these things which fall under taste, smell, sight, touch,
and hearing, are found to be changed, and yet the same wax remains. Perhaps it was what I now think, viz. that this wax was not that
sweetness of honey, nor that agreeable scent of flowers, nor that

particular whiteness, nor that figure, nor that sound, but simply a body
which a little while before appeared to me as perceptible under these
forms, and which is now perceptible under others. But what, precisely,
is it that I imagine when I form such conceptions? Let us attentively
consider this, and, abstracting from all that does not belong to the wax,
let us see what remains. Certainly nothing remains excepting a certain
extended thing which is flexible and movable. But what is the meaning
of flexible and movable? Is it not that I imagine that this piece of wax
being round is capable of becoming square and of passing from a
square to a triangular figure? No, certainly it is not that, since I imagine
it admits of an infinitude of similar changes, and I nevertheless do not
know how to compass the infinitude by my imagination, and
consequently this conception which I have of the wax is not brought
about by the faculty of imagination. What now is this extension? Is it
not also unknown? For it becomes greater when the wax is melted,
greater when it is boiled, and greater still when the heat increases; and I
should not conceive [clearly] according to truth what wax is, if I did not
think that even this piece that we are considering is capable of receiving
more variations in extension than I have ever imagined. We must then
grant that I could not even understand through the imagination what this
piece of wax is, and that it is my mind11 alone which perceives it. I say
this piece of wax in particular, for as to wax in general it is yet clearer. But what is this piece of wax which cannot be understood excepting by
the [understanding or] mind? It is certainly the same that I see, touch,
imagine, and finally it is the same which I have always believed it to be
from the beginning. But what must particularly be observed is that its
perception is neither an act of vision, nor of touch, nor of imagination,
and has never been such although it may have appeared formerly to be
so, but only an intuition12 of the mind, which may be imperfect and
confused as it was formerly, or clear and distinct as it is at present,
according as my attention is more or less directed to the elements which
are found in it, and of which it is composed. Yet in the meantime I am greatly astonished when I consider [the
great feebleness of mind] and its proneness to fall [insensibly] into
error; for although without giving expression to my thought I consider
all this in my own mind, words often impede me and I am almost
deceived by the terms of ordinary language. For we say that we see the
same wax, if it is present, and not that we simply judge that it is the

10 Sentire. 11 entendement F., mens L.
12 inspectio. 1-12

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

same from its having the same colour and figure. From this I should
conclude that I knew the wax by means of vision and not simply by the
intuition of the mind; unless by chance I remember that, when looking
from a window and saying I see men who pass in the street, I really do
not see them, but infer that what I see is men, just as I say that I see
wax. And yet what do I see from the window but hats and coats which
may cover automatic machines? Yet I judge these to be men. And
similarly solely by the faculty of judgment which rests in my mind, I
comprehend that which I believed I saw with my eyes. A man who makes it his aim to raise his knowledge above the
common should be ashamed to derive the occasion for doubting from
the forms of speech invented by the vulgar; I prefer to pass on and
consider whether I had a more evident and perfect conception of what
the wax was when I first perceived it, and when I believed I knew it by
means of the external senses or at least by the common sense 13 as it is
called, that is to say by the imaginative faculty, or whether my present
conception is clearer now that I have most carefully examined what it
is, and in what way it can be known. It would certainly be absurd to
doubt as to this. For what was there in this first perception which was
distinct? What was there which might not as well have been perceived
by any of the animals? But when I distinguish the wax from its external
forms, and when, just as if I had taken from it its vestments, I consider
it quite naked, it is certain that although some error may still be found
in my judgment, I can nevertheless not perceive it thus without a human
mind. But finally what shall I say of this mind, that is, of myself, for up to
this point I do not admit in myself anything but mind? What then, I
who seem to perceive this piece of wax so distinctly, do I not know
myself, not only with much more truth and certainty, but also with much
more distinctness and clearness? For if I judge that the wax is or exists
from the fact that I see it, it certainly follows much more clearly that I
am or that I exist myself from the fact that I see it. For it may be that
what I see is not really wax, it may also be that I do not possess eyes
with which to see anything; but it cannot be that when I see, or (for I no
longer take account of the distinction) when I think I see, that I myself
who think am nought. So if I judge that the wax exists from the fact
that I touch it, the same thing will follow, to wit, that I am; and if I
judge that my imagination, or some other cause, whatever it is,
persuades me that the wax exists, I shall still conclude the same. And

what I have here remarked of wax may be applied to all other things
which are external to me [and which are met with outside of me]. And
further, if the [notion or] perception of wax has seemed to me clearer
and more distinct, not only after the sight or the touch, but also after
many other causes have rendered it quite manifest to me, with how
much more [evidence] and distinctness must it be said that I now know
myself, since all the reasons which contribute to the knowledge of wax,
or any other body whatever, are yet better proofs of the nature of my
mind! And there are so many other things in the mind itself which may
contribute to the elucidation of its nature, that those which depend on
body such as these just mentioned, hardly merit being taken into
account. But finally here I am, having insensibly reverted to the point I
desired, for, since it is now manifest to me that even bodies are not
properly speaking known by the senses or by the faculty of imagination,
but by the understanding only, and since they are not known from the
fact that they are seen or touched, but only because they are understood,
I see clearly that there is nothing which is easier for me to know than
my mind. But because it is difficult to rid oneself so promptly of an
opinion to which one was accustomed for so long, it will be well that I
should halt a little at this point, so that by the length of my meditation I
may more deeply imprint on my memory this new knowledge. 13 sensus communis. Meditation III. Of God: that He exists. I shall now close my eyes, I shall stop my ears, I shall call away all my
senses, I shall efface even from my thoughts all the images of corporeal
things, or at least (for that is hardly possible) I shall esteem them as
vain and false; and thus holding converse only with myself and
considering my own nature, I shall try little by little to reach a better
knowledge of and a more familiar acquaintanceship with myself. I am a
thing that thinks, that is to say, that doubts, affirms, denies, that knows a
few things, that is ignorant of many [that loves, that hates], that wills,
that desires, that also imagines and perceives; for as I remarked before,
although the things which I perceive and imagine are perhaps nothing at
all apart from me and in themselves, I am nevertheless assured that
these modes of thought that I call perceptions and imaginations,
inasmuch only as they are modes of thought, certainly reside [and are
met with] in me. And in the little that I have just said, I think I have summed up all
12

1-13

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

that I really know, or at least all that hitherto I was aware that I knew. In order to try to extend my knowledge further, I shall now look around
more carefully and see whether I cannot still discover in myself some
other things which I have not hitherto perceived. I am certain that I am
a thing which thinks; but do I not then likewise know what is requisite
to render me certain of a truth? Certainly in this first knowledge there
is nothing that assures me of its truth, excepting the clear and distinct
perception of that which I state, which would not indeed suffice to
assure me that what I say is true, if it could ever happen that a thing
which I conceived so clearly and distinctly could be false; and
accordingly it seems to me that already I can establish as a general rule
that all things which I perceive14 very clearly and very distinctly are
true. At the same time I have before received and admitted many things
to be very certain and manifest, which yet I afterwards recognized as
being dubious. What then were these things? They were the earth, sky,
stars and all other objects which I apprehended by means of the senses. But what did I clearly [and distinctly] perceive in them? Nothing more
than that the ideas or thoughts of these things were presented to my
mind. And not even now do I deny that these ideas are met with in me. But there was yet another thing which I affirmed, and which, owing to
the habit which I had formed of believing it, I thought I perceived very
clearly, although in truth I did not perceive it at all, to wit, that there
were objects outside of me from which these ideas proceeded, and to
which they were entirely similar. And it was in this that I erred, or, if
perchance my judgment was correct, this was not due to any knowledge
arising from my perception. But when I took anything very simple and easy in the sphere of
arithmetic or geometry into consideration, e.g. that two and three
together made five, and other things of the sort, were not these present
to my mind so clearly as to enable me to affirm that they were true? Certainly if I judged that since such matters could be doubted, this
would not have been so for any other reason than that it came into my
mind that perhaps a God might have endowed me with such a nature
that I may have been deceived even concerning things which seemed to
me most manifest. But every time that this preconceived opinion of the
sovereign power of a God presents itself to my thought, I am
constrained to confess that it is easy to Him, if He wishes it, to cause
me to err, even in matters in which I believe myself to have the best

evidence. And, on the other hand, always when I direct my attention to
things which I believe myself to perceive very clearly, I am so
persuaded of their truth that I let myself break out into words such as
these: Let who will deceive me, He can never cause me to be nothing
while I think that I am, or some day cause it to be true to say that I have
never been, it being true now to say that I am, or that two and three
make more or less than five, or any such thing in which I see a manifest
contradiction. And, certainly, since I have no reason to believe that
there is a God who is a deceiver, and as I have not yet satisfied myself
that there is a God at all, the reason for doubt which depends on this
opinion alone is very slight, and so to speak metaphysical. But in order
to be able altogether to remove it, I must inquire whether there is a God
as soon as the occasion presents itself; and if I find that there is a God, I
must also inquire whether He may be a deceiver; for without a
knowledge of these two truths I do not see that I can ever be certain of
anything. And in order that I may have an opportunity of inquiring into this in
an orderly way [without interrupting the order of meditation which I
have proposed to myself, and which is little by little to pass from the
notions which I find first of all in my mind to those which I shall later
on discover in it] it is requisite that I should here divide my thoughts
into certain kinds, and that I should consider in which of these kinds
there is, properly speaking, truth or error to be found. Of my thoughts
some are, so to speak, images of the things, and to these alone is the
title “idea” properly applied; examples are my thought of a man or of a
chimera, of heaven, of an angel, or [even] of God. But other thoughts
possess other forms as well. For example in willing, fearing,
approving, denying, though I always perceive something as the subject
of the action of my mind,15 yet by this action I always add something
else to the idea16 which I have of that thing; and of the thoughts of this
kind some are called volitions or affections, and others judgments. Now as to what concerns ideas, if we consider them only in
themselves and do not relate them to anything else beyond themselves,
they cannot properly speaking be false; for whether I imagine a goat or
a chimera, it is not less true that I imagine the one that the other. We
must not fear likewise that falsity can enter into will and into affections,
for although I may desire evil things, or even things that never existed,

14 Percipio, F. nous concevons. 16 In the Latin version “similitudinem.”

15 The French version is followed here as being more explicit. In it “action de

mon esprit” replaces “mea cogitatio.”

1-14

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

it is not the less true that I desire them. Thus there remains no more
than the judgments which we make, in which I must take the greatest
care not to deceive myself. But the principal error and the commonest
which we may meet with in them, consists in my judging that the ideas
which are in me are similar or conformable to the things which are
outside me; for without doubt if I considered the ideas only as certain
modes of my thoughts, without trying to relate them to anything
beyond, they could scarcely give me material for error. But among these ideas, some appear to me to be innate, some
adventitious, and others to be formed [or invented] by myself; for, as I
have the power of understanding what is called a thing, or a truth, or a
thought, it appears to me that I hold this power from no other source
than my own nature. But if I now hear some sound, if I see the sun, or
feel heat, I have hitherto judged that these sensations proceeded from
certain things that exist outside of me; and finally it appears to me that
sirens, hippogryphs, and the like, are formed out of my own mind. But
again I may possibly persuade myself that all these ideas are of the
nature of those which I term adventitious, or else that they are all
innate, or all fictitious: for I have not yet clearly discovered their true
origin. And my principal task in this place is to consider, in respect to
those ideas which appear to me to proceed from certain objects that are
outside me, what are the reasons which cause me to think them similar
to these objects. It seems indeed in the first place that I am taught this
lesson by nature; and, secondly, I experience in myself that these ideas
do not depend on my will nor therefore on myself—for they often
present themselves to my mind in spite of my will. Just now, for
instance, whether I will or whether I do not will, I feel heat, and thus I
persuade myself that this feeling, or at least this idea of heat, is
produced in me by something which is different from me, i.e. by the
heat of the fire near which I sit. And nothing seems to me more
obvious than to judge that this object imprints its likeness rather than
anything else upon me. Now I must discover whether these proofs are sufficiently strong
and convincing. When I say that I am so instructed by nature, I merely
mean a certain spontaneous inclination which impels me to believe in
this connection, and not a natural light which makes me recognize that
it is true. But these two things are very different; for I cannot doubt that
which the natural light causes me to believe to be true, as, for example,
it has shown me that I am from the fact that I doubt, or other facts of the
same kind. And I possess no other faculty whereby to distinguish truth

from falsehood, which can teach me that what this light shows me to be
true is not really true, and no other faculty that is equally trustworthy. But as far as [apparently] natural impulses are concerned, I have
frequently remarked, when I had to make active choice between virtue
and vice, that they often enough led me to the part that was worse; and
this is why I do not see any reason for following them in what regards
truth and error. And as to the other reason, which is that these ideas must proceed
from objects outside me, since they do not depend on my will, I do not
find it any the more convincing. For just as these impulses of which I
have spoken are found in me, notwithstanding that they do not always
concur with my will, so perhaps there is in me some faculty fitted to
produce these ideas without the assistance of any external things, even
though it is not yet known by me; just as, apparently, they have hitherto
always been found in me during sleep without the aid of any external
objects. And finally, though they did proceed from objects different from
myself, it is not a necessary consequence that they should resemble
these. On the contrary, I have noticed that in many cases there was a
great difference between the object and its idea. I find, for example,
two completely diverse ideas of the sun in my mind; the one derives its
origin from the senses, and should be placed in the category of
adventitious ideas; according to this idea the sun seems to be extremely
small; but the other is derived from astronomical reasonings, i.e. is
elicited from certain notions that are innate in me, or else it is formed
by me in some other manner; in accordance with it the sun appears to be
several times greater than the earth. These two ideas cannot, indeed,
both resemble the same sun, and reason makes me believe that the one
which seems to have originated directly from the sun itself, is the one
which is most dissimilar to it. All this causes me to believe that until the present time it has not
been by a judgment that was certain [or premeditated], but only by a
sort of blind impulse that I believed that things existed outside of, and
different from me, which, by the organs of my senses, or by some other
method whatever it might be, conveyed these ideas or images to me
[and imprinted on me their similitudes]. But there is yet another method of inquiring whether any of the
objects of which I have ideas within me exist outside of me. If ideas are
only taken as certain modes of thought, I recognize amongst them no
difference or inequality, and all appear to proceed from me in the same
manner; but when we consider them as images, one representing one
14

1-15

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

thing and the other another, it is clear that they are very different one
from the other. There is no doubt that those which represent to me
substances are something more, and contain so to speak more objective
reality within them [that is to say, by representation participate in a
higher degree of being or perfection] than those that simply represent
modes or accidents; and that idea again by which I understand a
supreme God, eternal, infinite, [immutable], omniscient, omnipotent,
and Creator of all things which are outside of Himself, has certainly
more objective reality in itself than those ideas by which finite
substances are represented. Now it is manifest by the natural light that there must at least be as
much reality in the efficient and total cause as in its effect. For, pray,
whence can the effect derive its reality, if not from its cause? And in
what way can this cause communicate this reality to it, unless it
possessed it in itself? And from this it follows, not only that something
cannot proceed from nothing, but likewise that what is more perfect—
that is to say, which has more reality within itself—cannot proceed from
the less perfect. And this is not only evidently true of those effects
which possess actual or formal reality, but also of the ideas in which we
consider merely what is termed objective reality. To take an example,
the stone which has not yet existed not only cannot now commence to
be unless it has been produced by something which possesses within
itself, either formally or eminently, all that enters into the composition
of the stone [i.e. it must possess the same things or other more excellent
things than those which exist in the stone] and heat can only be
produced in a subject in which it did not previously exist by a cause that
is of an order [degree or kind] at least as perfect as heat, and so in all
other cases. But further, the idea of heat, or of a stone, cannot exist in
me unless it has been placed within me by some cause which possesses
within it at least as much reality as that which I conceive to exist in the
heat or the stone. For although this cause does not transmit anything of
its actual or formal reality to my idea, we must not for that reason
imagine that it is necessarily a less real cause; we must remember that
[since every idea is a work of the mind] its nature is such that it
demands of itself no other formal reality than that which it borrows
from my thought, of which it is only a mode [i.e. a manner or way of
thinking]. But in order that an idea should contain some one certain
objective reality rather than another, it must without doubt derive it
from some cause in which there is at least as much formal reality as this
idea contains of objective reality. For if we imagine that something is
found in an idea which is not found in the cause, it must then have been

derived from nought; but however imperfect may be this mode of being
by which a thing is objectively [or by representation] in the
understanding by its idea, we cannot certainly say that this mode of
being is nothing, nor consequently, that the idea derives its origin from
nothing. Nor must I imagine that, since the reality that I consider in these
ideas is only objective, it is not essential that this reality should be
formally in the causes of my ideas, but that it is sufficient that it should
be found objectively. For just as this mode of objective existence
pertains to ideas by their proper nature, so does the mode of formal
existence pertain to the causes of those ideas (this is at least true of the
first and principal) by the nature peculiar to them. And although it may
be the case that one idea gives birth to another idea, that cannot
continue to be so indefinitely; for in the end we must reach an idea
whose cause shall be so to speak an archetype, in which the whole
reality [or perfection] which is so to speak objectively [or by
representation] in these ideas is contained formally [and really]. Thus
the light of nature causes me to know clearly that the ideas in me are
like [pictures or] images which can, in truth, easily fall short of the
perfection of the objects from which they have been derived, but which
can never contain anything greater or more perfect. And the longer and the more carefully that I investigate these
matters, the more clearly and distinctly do I recognize their truth. But
what am I to conclude from it all in the end? It is this, that if the
objective reality of any one of my ideas is of such a nature as clearly to
make me recognize that it is not in me either formally or eminently, and
that consequently I cannot myself be the cause of it, it follows of
necessity that I am not alone in the world, but that there is another being
which exists, or which is the cause of this idea. On the other hand, had
no such an idea existed in me, I should have had no sufficient argument
to convince me of the existence of any being beyond myself; for I have
made very careful investigation everywhere and up to the present time
have been able to find no other ground. But of my ideas, beyond that which represents me to myself, as to
which there can here be no difficulty, there is another which represents
a God, and there are others representing corporeal and inanimate things,
others angels, others animals, and others again which represent to me
men similar to myself. As regards the ideas which represent to me other men or animals,
or angels, I can however easily conceive that they might be formed by
an admixture of the other ideas which I have of myself, of corporeal

1-16

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

things, and of God, even although there were apart from me neither men
nor animals, nor angels, in all the world. And in regard to the ideas of corporeal objects, I do not recognize
in them anything so great or so excellent that they might not have
possibly proceeded from myself; for if I consider them more closely,
and examine them individually, as I yesterday examined the idea of
wax, I find that there is very little in them which I perceive clearly and
distinctly. Magnitude or extension in length, breadth, or depth, I do so
perceive; also figure which results from a termination of this extension,
the situation which bodies of different figure preserve in relation to one
another, and movement or change of situation; to which we may also
add substance, duration and number. As to other things such as light,
colours, sounds, scents, tastes, heat, cold and the other tactile qualities,
they are thought by me with so much obscurity and confusion that I do
not even know if they are true or false, i.e. whether the ideas which I
form of these qualities are actually the ideas of real objects or not [or
whether they only represent chimeras which cannot exist in fact]. For
although I have before remarked that it is only in judgments that falsity,
properly speaking, or formal falsity, can be met with, a certain material
falsity may nevertheless be found in ideas, i.e. when these ideas
represent what is nothing as though it were something. For example,
the ideas which I have of cold and heat are so far from clear and distinct
that by their means I cannot tell whether cold is merely a privation of
heat, or heat a privation of cold, or whether both are real qualities, or
are not such. And inasmuch as [since ideas resemble images] there
cannot be any ideas which do not appear to represent some things, if it
is correct to say that cold is merely a privation of heat, the idea which
represents it to me as something real and positive will not be
improperly termed false, and the same holds good of other similar
ideas. To these it is certainly not necessary that I should attribute any
author other than myself. For if they are false, i.e. if they represent
things which do not exist, the light of nature shows me that they issue
from nought, that is to say, that they are only in me so far as something
is lacking to the perfection of my nature. But if they are true,
nevertheless because they exhibit so little reality to me that I cannot
even clearly distinguish the thing represented from non-being, I do not
see any reason why they should not be produced by myself. As to the clear and distinct idea which I have of corporeal things,
some of them seem as though I might have derived them from the idea
which I possess of myself, as those which I have of substance, duration,

number, and such like. For [even] when I think that a stone is a
substance, or at least a thing capable of existing of itself, and that I am a
substance also, although I conceive that I am a thing that thinks and not
one that is extended, and that the stone on the other hand is an extended
thing which does not think, and that thus there is a notable difference
between the two conceptions—they seem, nevertheless, to agree in this,
that both represent substances. In the same way, when I perceive that I
now exist and further recollect that I have in former times existed, and
when I remember that I have various thoughts of which I can recognize
the number, I acquire ideas of duration and number which I can
afterwards transfer to any object that I please. But as to all the other
qualities of which the ideas of corporeal things are composed, to wit,
extension, figure, situation and motion, it is true that they are not
formally in me, since I am only a thing that thinks; but because they are
merely certain modes of substance [and so to speak the vestments under
which corporeal substance appears to us] and because I myself am also
a substance, it would seem that they might be contained in me
eminently. Hence there remains only the idea of God, concerning which we
must consider whether it is something which cannot have proceeded
from me myself. By the name God I understand a substance that is
infinite [eternal, immutable], independent, all-knowing, all-powerful,
and by which I myself and everything else, if anything else does exist,
have been created. Now all these characteristics are such that the more
diligently I attend to them, the less do they appear capable of
proceeding from me alone; hence, from what has been already said, we
must conclude that God necessarily exists. For although the idea of substance is within me owing to the fact
that I am substance, nevertheless I should not have the idea of an
infinite substance—since I am finite—if it had not proceeded from
some substance which was veritably infinite. Nor should I imagine that I do not perceive the infinite by a true
idea, but only by the negation of the finite, just as I perceive repose and
darkness by the negation of movement and of light; for, on the contrary,
I see that there is manifestly more reality in infinite substance than in
finite, and therefore that in some way I have in me the notion of the
infinite earlier then the finite—to wit, the notion of God before that of
myself. For how would it be possible that I should know that I doubt
and desire, that is to say, that something is lacking to me, and that I am
not quite perfect, unless I had within me some idea of a Being more
perfect than myself, in comparison with which I should recognize the
16

1-17

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

deficiencies of my nature? And we cannot say that this idea of God is perhaps materially false
and that consequently I can derive it from nought [i.e. that possibly it
exists in me because I am imperfect], as I have just said is the case with
ideas of heat, cold and other such things; for, on the contrary, as this
idea is very clear and distinct and contains within it more objective
reality than any other, there can be none which is of itself more true, nor
any in which there can be less suspicion of falsehood. The idea, I say,
of this Being who is absolutely perfect and infinite, is entirely true; for
although, perhaps, we can imagine that such a Being does not exist, we
cannot nevertheless imagine that His idea represents nothing real to me,
as I have said of the idea of cold. This idea is also very clear and
distinct; since all that I conceive clearly and distinctly of the real and
the true, and of what conveys some perfection, is in its entirety
contained in this idea. And this does not cease to be true although I do
not comprehend the infinite, or though in God there is an infinitude of
things which I cannot comprehend, nor possibly even reach in any way
by thought; for it is of the nature of the infinite that my nature, which is
finite and limited, should not comprehend it; and it is sufficient that I
should understand this, and that I should judge that all things which I
clearly perceive and in which I know that there is some perfection, and
possibly likewise an infinitude of properties of which I am ignorant, are
in God formally or eminently, so that the idea which I have of Him may
become the most true, most clear, and most distinct of all the ideas that
are in my mind. But possibly I am something more than I suppose myself to be, and
perhaps all those perfections which I attribute to God are in some way
potentially in me, although they do not yet disclose themselves, or issue
in action. As a matter of fact I am already sensible that my knowledge
increases [and perfects itself] little by little, and I see nothing which can
prevent it from increasing more and more into infinitude; nor do I see,
after it has thus been increased [or perfected], anything to prevent my
being able to acquire by its means all the other perfections of the Divine
nature; nor finally why the power I have of acquiring these perfections,
if it really exists in me, shall not suffice to produce the ideas of them. At the same time I recognize that this cannot be. For, in the first
place, although it were true that every day my knowledge acquired new
degrees of perfection, and that there were in my nature many things
potentially which are not yet there actually, nevertheless these
excellences do not pertain to [or make the smallest approach to] the
idea which I have of God in whom there is nothing merely potential

[but in whom all is present really and actually]; for it is an infallible
token of imperfection in my knowledge that it increases little by little. and further, although my knowledge grows more and more,
nevertheless I do not for that reason believe that it can ever be actually
infinite, since it can never reach a point so high that it will be unable to
attain to any greater increase. But I understand God to be actually
infinite, so that He can add nothing to His supreme perfection. And
finally I perceive that the objective being of an idea cannot be produced
by a being that exists potentially only, which properly speaking is
nothing, but only by a being which is formal or actual. To speak the truth, I see nothing in all that I have just said which by
the light of nature is not manifest to anyone who desires to think
attentively on the subject; but when I slightly relax my attention, my
mind, finding its vision somewhat obscured and so to speak blinded by
the images of sensible objects, I do not easily recollect the reason why
the idea that I possess of a being more perfect then I, must necessarily
have been placed in me by a being which is really more perfect; and this
is why I wish here to go on to inquire whether I, who have this idea, can
exist if no such being exists. And I ask, from whom do I then derive my existence? Perhaps
from myself or from my parents, or from some other source less perfect
than God; for we can imagine nothing more perfect than God, or even
as perfect as He is. But [were I independent of every other and] were I myself the
author of my being, I should doubt nothing and I should desire nothing,
and finally no perfection would be lacking to me; for I should have
bestowed on myself every perfection of which I possessed any idea and
should thus be God. And it must not be imagined that those things that
are lacking to me are perhaps more difficult of attainment than those
which I already possess; for, on the contrary, it is quite evident that it
was a matter of much greater difficulty to bring to pass that I, that is to
say, a thing or a substance that thinks, should emerge out of nothing,
than it would be to attain to the knowledge of many things of which I
am ignorant, and which are only the accidents of this thinking
substance. But it is clear that if I had of myself possessed this greater
perfection of which I have just spoken [that is to say, if I had been the
author of my own existence], I should not at least have denied myself
the things which are the more easy to acquire [to wit, many branches of
knowledge of which my nature is destitute]; nor should I have deprived
myself of any of the things contained in the idea which I form of God,
because there are none of them which seem to me specially difficult to

1-18

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

acquire: and if there were any that were more difficult to acquire, they
would certainly appear to me to be such (supposing I myself were the
origin of the other things which I possess) since I should discover in
them that my powers were limited. But though I assume that perhaps I have always existed just as I am
at present, neither can I escape the force of this reasoning, and imagine
that the conclusion to be drawn from this is, that I need not seek for any
author of my existence. For all the course of my life may be divided
into an infinite number of parts, none of which is in any way dependent
on the other; and thus from the fact that I was in existence a short time
ago it does not follow that I must be in existence now, unless some
cause at this instant, so to speak, produces me anew, that is to say,
conserves me. It is as a matter of fact perfectly clear and evident to all
those who consider with attention the nature of time, that, in order to be
conserved in each moment in which it endures, a substance has need of
the same power and action as would be necessary to produce and create
it anew, supposing it did not yet exist, so that the light of nature shows
us clearly that the distinction between creation and conservation is
solely a distinction of the reason. All that I thus require here is that I should interrogate myself, if I
wish to know whether I possess a power which is capable of bringing it
to pass that I who now am shall still be in the future; for since I am
nothing but a thinking thing, or at least since thus far it is only this
portion of myself which is precisely in question at present, if such a
power did reside in me, I should certainly be conscious of it. But I am
conscious of nothing of the kind, and by this I know clearly that I
depend on some being different from myself. Possibly, however, this being on which I depend is not that which I
call God, and I am created either by my parents or by some other cause
less perfect than God. This cannot be, because, as I have just said, it is
perfectly evident that there must be at least as much reality in the cause
as in the effect; and thus since I am a thinking thing, and possess an
idea of God within me, whatever in the end be the cause assigned to my
existence, it must be allowed that it is likewise a thinking thing and that
it possesses in itself the idea of all the perfections which I attribute to
God. We may again inquire whether this cause derives its origin from
itself or from some other thing. For if from itself, it follows by the
reasons before brought forward, that this cause must itself be God; for
since it possesses the virtue of self-existence, it must also without doubt
have the power of actually possessing all the perfections of which it has
the idea, that is, all those which I conceive as existing in God. But if it

derives its existence from some other cause than itself, we shall again
ask, for the same reason, whether this second cause exists by itself or
through another, until from one step to another, we finally arrive at an
ultimate cause, which will be God. And it is perfectly manifest that in this there can be no regression
into infinity, since what is in question is not so much the cause which
formerly created me, as that which conserves me at the present time. Nor can we suppose that several causes may have concurred in my
production, and that from one I have received the idea of one of the
perfections which I attribute to God, and from another the idea of some
other, so that all these perfections indeed exist somewhere in the
universe, but not as complete in one unity which is God. On the
contrary, the unity, the simplicity or the inseparability of all things
which are in god is one of the principal perfections which I conceive to
be in Him. And certainly the idea of this unity of all Divine perfections
cannot have been placed in me by any cause from which I have not
likewise received the ideas of all the other perfections; for this cause
could not make me able to comprehend them as joined together in an
inseparable unity without having at the same time caused me in some
measure to know what they are [and in some way to recognize each one
of them]. Finally, so far as my parents [from whom it appears I have sprung]
are concerned, although all that I have ever been able to believe of them
were true, that does not make it follow that it is they who conserve me,
nor are they even the authors of my being in any sense, in so far as I am
a thinking being; since what they did was merely to implant certain
dispositions in that matter in which the self—i.e. the mind, which alone
I at present identify with myself—is by me deemed to exist. And thus
there can be no difficulty in their regard, but we must of necessity
conclude from the fact alone that I exist, or that the idea of a Being
supremely perfect—that is of God—is in me, that the proof of God’s
existence is grounded on the highest evidence. It only remains to me to examine into the manner in which I have
acquired this idea from God; for I have not received it through the
senses, and it is never presented to me unexpectedly, as is usual with
the ideas of sensible things when these things present themselves, or
seem to present themselves, to the external organs of my senses; nor is
it likewise a fiction of my mind, for it is not in my power to take from
or to add anything to it; and consequently the only alternative is that it
is innate in me, just as the idea of myself is innate in me. And one certainly ought not to find it strange that God, in creating
18

1-19

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

me, placed this idea within me to be like the mark of the workman
imprinted on his work; and it is likewise not essential that the mark
shall be something different from the work itself. For from the sole fact
that God created me it is most probable that in some way he has placed
his image and similitude upon me, and that I perceive this similitude (in
which the idea of God is contained) by means of the same faculty by
which I perceive myself—that is to say, when I reflect on myself I not
only know that I am something [imperfect], incomplete and dependent
on another, which incessantly aspires after something which is better
and greater than myself, but I also know that He on whom I depend
possesses in Himself all the great things towards which I aspire [and the
ideas of which I find within myself], and that not indefinitely or
potentially alone, but really, actually and infinitely; and that thus He is
God. And the whole strength of the argument which I have here made
use of to prove the existence of God consists in this, that I recognize
that it is not possible that my nature should be what it is, and indeed
that I should have in myself the idea of a God, if God did not veritably
exist—a God, I say, whose idea is in me, i.e. who possesses all those
supreme perfections of which our mind may indeed have some idea but
without understanding them all, who is liable to no errors or defect [and
who has none of all those marks which denote imperfection]. From this
it is manifest that He cannot be a deceiver, since the light of nature
teaches us that fraud and deception necessarily proceed from some
defect. But before I examine this matter with more care, and pass on to the
consideration of other truths which may be derived from it, it seems to
me right to pause for a while in order to contemplate God Himself, to
ponder at leisure His marvellous attributes, to consider, and admire, and
adore, the beauty of this light so resplendent, at least as far as the
strength of my mind, which is in some measure dazzled by the sight,
will allow me to do so. For just as faith teaches us that the supreme
felicity of the other life consists only in this contemplation of the Divine
Majesty, so we continue to learn by experience that a similar
meditation, though incomparably less perfect, causes us to enjoy the
greatest satisfaction of which we are capable in this life. from my senses, and I have accurately observed that there are very few
things that one knows with certainty respecting corporeal objects, that
there are many more which are known to us respecting the human mind,
and yet more still regarding God Himself; so that I shall now without
any difficulty abstract my thoughts from the consideration of [sensible
or] imaginable objects, and carry them to those which, being withdrawn
from all contact with matter, are purely intelligible. And certainly the
idea which I possess of the human mind inasmuch as it is a thinking
thing, and not extended in length, width and depth, nor participating in
anything pertaining to body, is incomparably more distinct than is the
idea of any corporeal thing. And when I consider that I doubt, that is to
say, that I am an incomplete and dependent being, the idea of a being
that is complete and independent, that is of God, presents itself to my
mind with so much distinctness and clearness—and from the fact alone
that this idea is found in me, or that I who possess this idea exist, I
conclude so certainly that God exists, and that my existence depends
entirely on Him in every moment of my life—that I do not think that the
human mind is capable of knowing anything with more evidence and
certitude. And it seems to me that I now have before me a road which
will lead us from the contemplation of the true God (in whom all the
treasures of science and wisdom are contained) to the knowledge of the
other objects of the universe. For, first of all, I recognize it to be impossible that He should ever
deceive me; for in all fraud and deception some imperfection is to be
found, and although it may appear that the power of deception is a mark
of subtilty or power, yet the desire to deceive without doubt testifies to
malice or feebleness, and accordingly cannot be found in God. In the next place I experienced in myself a certain capacity for
judging which I have doubtless received from God, like all the other
things that I possess; and as He could not desire to deceive me, it is
clear that He has not given me a faculty that will lead me to err if I use
it aright. And no doubt respecting this matter could remain, if it were not
that the consequence would seem to follow that I can thus never be
deceived; for if I hold all that I possess from God, and if He has not
placed in me the capacity for error, it seems as though I could never fall
into error. And it is true that when I think only of God [and direct my
mind wholly to Him],17 I discover [in myself] no cause of error, or
falsity; yet directly afterwards, when recurring to myself, experience

Meditation IV. Of the True and the False. I have been well accustomed these past days to detach my mind

17 Not in the French version. 1-20

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

shows me that I am nevertheless subject to an infinitude of errors, as to
which, when we come to investigate them more closely, I notice that not
only is there a real and positive idea of God or of a Being of supreme
perfection present to my mind, but also, so to speak, a certain negative
idea of nothing, that is, of that which is infinitely removed from any
kind of perfection; and that I am in a sense something intermediate
between God and nought, i.e. placed in such a manner between the
supreme Being and non-being, that there is in truth nothing in me that
can lead to error in so far as a sovereign Being has formed me; but that,
as I in some degree participate likewise in nought or in non-being, i.e. in so far as I am not myself the supreme Being, and as I find myself
subject to an infinitude of imperfections, I ought not to be astonished if
I should fall into error. Thus do I recognize that error, in so far as it is
such, is not a real thing depending on God, but simply a defect; and
therefore, in order to fall into it, that I have no need to possess a special
faculty given me by God for this very purpose, but that I fall into error
from the fact that the power given me by God for the purpose of
distinguishing truth from error is not infinite. Nevertheless this does not quite satisfy me; for error is not a pure
negation [i.e. is not the dimple defect or want of some perfection which
ought not to be mine], but it is a lack of some knowledge which it
seems that I ought to possess. And on considering the nature of God it
does not appear to me possible that He should have given me a faculty
which is not perfect of its kind, that is, which is wanting in some
perfection due to it. For if it is true that the more skillful the artizan, the
more perfect is the work of his hands, what can have been produced by
this supreme Creator of all things that is not in all its parts perfect? And certainly there is no doubt that God could have created me so that I
could never have been subject to error; it is also certain that He ever
wills what is best; is it then better that I should be subject to err than
that I should not? In considering this more attentively, it occurs to me in the first
place that I should not be astonished if my intelligence is not capable of
comprehending why God acts as He does; and that there is thus no
reason to doubt of His existence from the fact that I may perhaps find
many other things besides this as to which I am able to understand
neither for what reason nor how God has produced them. For, in the
first place, knowing that my nature is extremely feeble and limited, and
that the nature of God is on the contrary immense, incomprehensible,
and infinite, I have no further difficulty in recognising that there is an
infinitude of matter in His power, the causes of which transcend my

knowledge; and this reason suffices to convince me that the species of
cause termed final, finds no useful employment in physical [or natural]
things; for it does not appear to me that I can without temerity seek to
investigate the [inscrutable] ends of God. It further occurs to me that we should not consider one single
creature separately, when we inquire as to whether the works of God
are perfect, but should regard all his creations together. For the same
thing which might possibly seem very imperfect with some semblance
of reason if regarded by itself, is found to be very perfect if regarded as
part of the whole universe; and although, since I resolved to doubt all
things, I as yet have only known certainly my own existence and that of
God, nevertheless since I have recognized the infinite power of God, I
cannot deny that He may have produced many other things, or at least
that He has the power of producing them, so that I may obtain a place
as a part of a great universe. Whereupon, regarding myself more closely, and considering what
are my errors (for they alone testify to there being any imperfection in
me), I answer that they depend on a combination of two causes, to wit,
on the faculty of knowledge that rests in me, and on the power of choice
or of free will—that is to say, of the understanding and at the same time
of the will. For by the understanding alone I [neither assert nor deny
anything, but] apprehend18 the ideas of things as to which I can form a
judgment. But no error is properly speaking found in it, provided the
word error is taken in its proper signification; and though there is
possibly an infinitude of things in the world of which I have no idea in
my understanding, we cannot for all that say that it is deprived of these
ideas [as we might say of something which is required by its nature],
but simply it does not possess these; because in truth there is no reason
to prove that God should have given me a greater faculty of knowledge
than He has given me; and however skillful a workman I represent Him
to be, I should not for all that consider that He was bound to have
placed in each of His works all the perfections which He may have been
able to place in some. I likewise cannot complain that God has not
given me a free choice or a will which is sufficient, ample and perfect,
since as a matter of fact I am conscious of a will so extended as to be
subject to no limits. And what seems to me very remarkable in this
regard is that of all the qualities which I possess there is no one so
perfect and so comprehensive that I do not very clearly recognize that it
might be yet greater and more perfect. For, to take an example, if I
18 percipio. 20

1-21

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

consider the faculty of comprehension which I possess, I find that it is
of very small extent and extremely limited, and at the same time I find
the idea of another faculty much more ample and even infinite, and
seeing that I can form the idea of it, I recognize from this very fact that
it pertains to the nature of God. If in the same way I examine the
memory, the imagination, or some other faculty, I do not find any which
is not small and circumscribed, while in God it is immense [or infinite]. It is free-will alone or liberty of choice which I find to be so great in me
that I can conceive no other idea to be more great; it is indeed the case
that it is for the most part this will that causes me to know that in some
manner I bear the image and similitude of God. For although the power
of will is incomparably greater in God than in me, both by reason of the
knowledge and the power which, conjoined with it, render it stronger
and more efficacious, and by reason of its object, inasmuch as in God it
extends to a great many things; it nevertheless does not seem to me
greater if I consider it formally and precisely in itself: for the faculty of
will consists alone in our having the power of choosing to do a thing or
choosing not to do it (that is, to affirm or deny, to pursue or to shun it),
or rather it consists alone in the fact that in order to affirm or deny,
pursue or shun those things placed before us by the understanding, we
act so that we are unconscious that any outside force constrains us in
doing so. For in order that I should be free it is not necessary that I
should be indifferent as to the choice of one or the other of two
contraries; but contrariwise the more I lean to the one—whether I
recognize clearly that the reasons of the good and true are to be found
in it, or whether God so disposes my inward thought—the more freely
do I choose and embrace it. And undoubtedly both divine grace and
natural knowledge, far from diminishing my liberty, rather increase it
and strengthen it. Hence this indifference which I feel, when I am not
swayed to one side rather than to the other by lack of reason, is the
lowest grade of liberty, and rather evinces a lack or negation in
knowledge than a perfection of will: for if I always recognized clearly
what was true and good, I should never have trouble in deliberating as
to what judgment or choice I should make, and then I should be entirely
free without ever being indifferent. From all this I recognize that the power of will which I have
received from God is not of itself the source of my errors—for it is very
ample and very perfect of its kind—any more than is the power of
understanding; for since I understand nothing but by the power which
God has given me for understanding, there is no doubt that all that I
understand, I understand as I ought, and it is not possible that I err in

this. Whence then come my errors? They come from the sole fact that
since the will is much wider in its range and compass than the
understanding, I do not restrain it within the same bounds, but extend it
also to things which I do not understand: and as the will is of itself
indifferent to these, it easily falls into error and sin, and chooses the evil
for the good, or the false for the true. For example, when I lately examined whether anything existed in
the world, and found that from the very fact that I considered this
question it followed very clearly that I myself existed, I could not
prevent myself from believing that a thing I so clearly conceived was
true: not that I found myself compelled to do so by some external
cause, but simply because from great clearness in my mind there
followed a great inclination of my will; and I believed this with so much
the greater freedom or spontaneity as I possessed the less indifference
towards it. Now, on the contrary, I not only know that I exist, inasmuch
as I am a thinking thing, but a certain representation of corporeal nature
is also presented to my mind; and it comes to pass that I doubt whether
this thinking nature which is in me, or rather by which I am what I am,
differs from this corporeal nature, or whether both are not simply the
same thing; and I here suppose that I do not yet know any reason to
persuade me to adopt the one belief rather than the other. From this it
follows that I am entirely indifferent as to which of the two I affirm or
deny, or even whether I abstain from forming any judgment in the
matter. And this indifference does not only extend to matters as to which
the understanding has no knowledge, but also in general to all those
which are not apprehended with perfect clearness at the moment when
the will is deliberating upon them: for, however probable are the
conjectures which render me disposed to form a judgment respecting
anything, the simple knowledge that I have that those are conjectures
alone and not certain and indubitable reasons, suffices to occasion me
to judge the contrary. Of this I have had great experience of late when I
set aside as false all that I had formerly held to be absolutely true, for
the sole reason that I remarked that it might in some measure be
doubted. But if I abstain from giving my judgment on any thing when I do
not perceive it with sufficient clearness and distinctness, it is plain that I
act rightly and am not deceived. But if I determine to deny or affirm, I
no longer make use as I should of my free will, and if I affirm what is
not true, it is evident that I deceive myself; even though I judge
according to truth, this comes about only by chance, and I do not escape

1-22

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

the blame of misusing my freedom; for the light of nature teaches us
that the knowledge of the understanding should always precede the
determination of the will. And it is in the misuse of the free will that
the privation which constitutes the characteristic nature of error is met
with. Privation, I say, is found in the act, in so far as it proceeds from
me, but it is not found in the faculty which I have received from God,
nor even in the act in so far as it depends on Him. For I have certainly no cause to complain that God has not given
me an intelligence which is more powerful, or a natural light which is
stronger than that which I have received from Him, since it is proper to
the finite understanding not to comprehend a multitude of things, and it
is proper to a created understanding to be finite; on the contrary, I have
every reason to render thanks to God who owes me nothing and who
has given me all the perfections I possess, and I should be far from
charging Him with injustice, and with having deprived me of, or
wrongfully withheld from me, these perfections which He has not
bestowed upon me. I have further no reason to complain that He has given me a will
more ample than my understanding, for since the will consists only of
one single element, and is so to speak indivisible, it appears that its
nature is such that nothing can be abstracted from it [without destroying
it]; and certainly the more comprehensive it is found to be, the more
reason I have to render gratitude to the giver. And, finally, I must also not complain that God concurs with me in
forming the acts of the will, that is the judgment in which I go astray,
because these acts are entirely true and good, inasmuch as they depend
on God; and in a certain sense more perfection accrues to my nature
from the fact that I can form them, than if I could not do so. As to the
privation in which alone the formal reason of error or sin consists, it has
no need of any concurrence from God, since it is not a thing [or an
existence], and since it is not related to God as to a cause, but should be
termed merely a negation [according to the significance given to these
words in the Schools]. For in fact it is not an imperfection in God that
He has given me the liberty to give or withhold my assent from certain
things as to which He has not placed a clear and distinct knowledge in
my understanding; but it is without doubt an imperfection in me not to
make a good use of my freedom, and to give my judgment readily on
matters which I only understand obscurely. I nevertheless perceive that
God could easily have created me so that I never should err, although I
still remained free, and endowed with a limited knowledge, viz. by
giving to my understanding a clear and distinct intelligence of all things

as to which I should ever have to deliberate; or simply by His engraving
deeply in my memory the resolution never to form a judgment on
anything without having a clear and distinct understanding of it, so that
I could never forget it. And it is easy for me to understand that, in so
far as I consider myself alone, and as if there were only myself in the
world, I should have been much more perfect than I am, if God had
created me so that I could never err. Nevertheless I cannot deny that in
some sense it is a greater perfection in the whole universe that certain
parts should not be exempt from error as others are than that all parts
should be exactly similar. And I have no right to complain if God,
having placed me in the world, has not called upon me to play a part
that excels all others in distinction and perfection. And further I have reason to be glad on the ground that if He has
not given me the power of never going astray by the first means pointed
out above, which depends on a clear and evident knowledge of all the
things regarding which I can deliberate, He has at least left within my
power the other means, which is firmly to adhere to the resolution never
to give judgment on matters whose truth is not clearly known to me; for
although I notice a certain weakness in my nature in that I cannot
continually concentrate my mind on one single thought, I can yet, by
attentive and frequently repeated meditation, impress it so forcibly on
my memory that I shall never fail to recollect it whenever I have need
of it, and thus acquire the habit of never going astray. And inasmuch as it is in this that the greatest and principal
perfection of man consists, it seems to me that I have not gained little
by this day's Meditation, since I have discovered the source of falsity
and error. And certainly there can be no other source than that which I
have explained; for as often as I so restrain my will within the limits of
my knowledge that it forms no judgment except on matters which are
clearly and distinctly represented to it by the understanding, I can never
be deceived; for every clear and distinct conception19 is without doubt
something, and hence cannot derive its origin from what is nought, but
must of necessity have God as its author—God, I say, who being
supremely perfect, cannot be the cause of any error; and consequently
we must conclude that such a conception [or such a judgment] is true. Nor have I only learned to-day what I should avoid in order that I may
not err, but also how I should act in order to arrive at a knowledge of
the truth; for without doubt I shall arrive at this end if I devote my
attention sufficiently to those things which I perfectly understand; and if
19 perceptio. 22

1-23

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

I separate from these that which I only understand confusedly and with
obscurity. To these I shall henceforth diligently give heed. thought, or ever have been, there is nevertheless in this figure a certain
determinate nature, form, or essence, which is immutable and eternal,
which I have not invented, and which in no wise depends on my mind,
as appears from the fact that diverse properties of that triangle can be
demonstrated, viz. that its three angles are equal to two right angles,
that the greatest side is subtended by the greatest angle, and the like,
which now, whether I wish it or do not wish it, I recognize very clearly
as pertaining to it, although I never thought of the matter at all when I
imagined a triangle for the first time, and which therefore cannot be
said to have been invented by me. Nor does the objection hold good that possibly this idea of a
triangle has reached my mind through the medium of my senses, since I
have sometimes seen bodies triangular in shape; because I can form in
my mind an infinitude of other figures regarding which we cannot have
the least conception of their ever having been objects of sense, and I
can nevertheless demonstrate various properties pertaining to their
nature as well as to that of the triangle, and these must certainly all be
true since I conceive them clearly. Hence they are something, and not
pure negation; for it is perfectly clear that all that is true is something,
and I have already fully demonstrated that all that I know clearly is true. And even although I had not demonstrated this, the nature of my mind
is such that I could not prevent myself from holding them to be true so
long as I conceive them clearly; and I recollect that even when I was
still strongly attached to the objects of sense, I counted as the most
certain those truths which I conceived clearly as regards figures,
numbers, and the other matters which pertain to arithmetic and
geometry, and, in general, to pure and abstract mathematics. But now, if just because I can draw the idea of something from my
thought, it follows that all which I know clearly and distinctly as
pertaining to this object does really belong to it, may I not derive from
this an argument demonstrating the existence of God? It is certain that I
no less find the idea of God, that is to say, the idea of a supremely
perfect Being, in me, than that of any figure or number whatever it is;
and I do not know any less clearly and distinctly that an [actual and]
eternal existence pertains to this nature than I know that all that which I
am able to demonstrate of some figure or number truly pertains to the
nature of this figure or number, and therefore, although all that I
concluded in the preceding Meditations were found to be false, the
existence of God would pass with me as at least as certain as I have
ever held the truths of mathematics (which concern only numbers and
figures) to be. Meditation V. Of the essence of material things, and, again, of God,
that He exists. Many other matters respecting the attributes of God and my own
nature or mind remain for consideration; but I shall possibly on another
occasion resume the investigation of these. Now (after first noting what
must be done or avoided, in order to arrive at a knowledge of the truth)
my principal task is to endeavour to emerge from the state of doubt into
which I have these last days fallen, and to see whether nothing certain
can be known regarding material things. But before examining whether any such objects as I conceive exist
outside of me, I must consider the ideas of them in so far as they are in
my thought, and see which of them are distinct and which confused. In the first place, I am able distinctly to imagine that quantity which
philosophers commonly call continuous, or the extension in length,
breadth, or depth, that is in this quantity, or rather in the object to which
it is attributed. Further, I can number in it many different parts, and
attribute to each of its parts many sorts of size, figure, situation and
local movement, and, finally, I can assign to each of these movements
all degrees of duration. And not only do I know these things with distinctness when I
consider them in general, but, likewise [however little I apply my
attention to the matter], I discover an infinitude of particulars respecting
numbers, figures, movements, and other such things, whose truth is so
manifest, and so well accords with my nature, that when I begin to
discover them, it seems to me that I learn nothing new, or recollect what
I formerly knew—that is to say, that I for the first time perceive things
which were already present to my mind, although I had not as yet
applied my mind to them. And what I here find to be most important is that I discover in
myself an infinitude of ideas of certain things which cannot be esteemed
as pure negations, although they may possibly have no existence outside
of my thought, and which are not framed by me, although it is within
my power either to think or not to think them, but which possess natures
which are true and immutable. For example, when I imagine a triangle,
although there may nowhere in the world be such a figure outside my

1-24

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

This indeed is not at first manifest, since it would seem to present
some appearance of being a sophism. For being accustomed in all other
things to make a distinction between existence and essence, I easily
persuade myself that the existence can be separated from the essence of
God, and that we can thus conceive God as not actually existing. But,
nevertheless, when I think of it with more attention, I clearly see that
existence can no more be separated from the essence of God than can
its having its three angles equal to two right angles be separated from
the essence of a [rectilinear] triangle, or the idea of a mountain from the
idea of a valley; and so there is not any less repugnance to our
conceiving a God (that is, a Being supremely perfect) to whom
existence is lacking (that is to say, to whom a certain perfection is
lacking), than to conceive of a mountain which has no valley. But although I cannot really conceive of a God without existence
any more than a mountain without a valley, still from the fact that I
conceive of a mountain with a valley, it does not follow that there is
such a mountain in the world; similarly although I conceive of God as
possessing existence, it would seem that it does not follow that there is
a God which exists; for my thought does not impose any necessity upon
things, and just as I may imagine a winged horse, although no horse
with wings exists, so I could perhaps attribute existence to God,
although no God existed. But a sophism is concealed in this objection; for from the fact that I
cannot conceive a mountain without a valley, it does not follow that
there is any mountain or any valley in existence, but only that the
mountain and the valley, whether they exist or do not exist, cannot in
any way be separated one from the other. While from the fact that I
cannot conceive God without existence, it follows that existence is
inseparable from Him, and hence that He really exists; not that my
thought can bring this to pass, or impose any necessity on things, but,
on the contrary, because the necessity which lies in the thing itself, i.e. the necessity of the existence of God determines me to think in this
way. For it is not within my power to think of God without existence
(that is of a supremely perfect Being devoid of a supreme perfection)
though it is in my power to imagine a horse either with wings or without
wings. And we must not here object that it is in truth necessary for me to
assert that God exists after having presupposed that He possesses every
sort of perfection, since existence is one of these, but that as a matter of
fact my original supposition was not necessary, just as it is not
necessary to consider that all quadrilateral figures can be inscribed in

the circle; for supposing I thought this, I should be constrained to admit
that the rhombus might be inscribed in the circle since it is a
quadrilateral figure, which, however, is manifestly false. [We must not,
I say, make any such allegations because] although it is not necessary
that I should at any time entertain the notion of God, nevertheless
whenever it happens that I think of a first and a sovereign Being, and,
so to speak, derive the idea of Him from the storehouse of my mind, it
is necessary that I should attribute to Him every sort of perfection,
although I do not get so far as to enumerate them all, or to apply my
mind to each one in particular. And this necessity suffices to make me
conclude (after having recognized that existence is a perfection) that
this first and sovereign Being really exists; just as though it is not
necessary for me ever to imagine any triangle, yet, whenever I wish to
consider a rectilinear figure composed only of three angles, it is
absolutely essential that I should attribute to it all those properties
which serve to bring about the conclusion that its three angles are not
greater than two right angles, even although I may not then be
considering this point in particular. But when I consider which figures
are capable of being inscribed in the circle, it is in no wise necessary
that I should think that all quadrilateral figures are of this number; on
the contrary, I cannot even pretend that this is the case, so long as I do
not desire to accept anything which I cannot conceive clearly and
distinctly. And in consequence there is a great difference between the
false suppositions such as this, and the true ideas born within me, the
first and principal of which is that of God. For really I discern in many
ways that this idea is not something factitious, and depending solely on
my thought, but that it is the image of a true and immutable nature; first
of all, because I cannot conceive anything but God himself to whose
essence existence [necessarily] pertains; in the second place because it
is not possible for me to conceive two or more Gods in this same
position; and, granted that there is one such God who now exists, I see
clearly that it is necessary that He should have existed from all eternity,
and that He must exist eternally; and finally, because I know an
infinitude of other properties in God, none of which I can either
diminish or change. For the rest, whatever proof or argument I avail myself of, we must
always return to the point that it is only those things which we conceive
clearly and distinctly that have the power of persuading me entirely. And although amongst the matters which I conceive of in this way,
some indeed are manifestly obvious to all, while others only manifest
themselves to those who consider them closely and examine them
24

1-25

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

attentively; still, after they have once been discovered, the latter are not
esteemed as any less certain than the former. For example, in the case
of every right-angled triangle, although it does not so manifestly appear
that the square of the base is equal to the squares of the two other sides
as that this base is opposite to the greatest angle; still, when this has
once been apprehended, we are just as certain of its truth as of the truth
of the other. And as regards God, if my mind were not pre-occupied
with prejudices, and if my thought did not find itself on all hands
diverted by the continual pressure of sensible things, there would be
nothing which I could know more immediately and more easily than
Him. For is there anything more manifest than that there is a God, that
is to say, a Supreme Being, to whose essence alone existence pertains?20
And although for a firm grasp of this truth I have need of a
strenuous application of mind, at present I not only feel myself to be as
assured of it as of all that I hold as most certain, but I also remark that
the certainty of all other things depends on it so absolutely, that without
this knowledge it is impossible ever to know anything perfectly. For although I am of such a nature that as long as 21 I understand
anything very clearly and distinctly, I am naturally impelled to believe it
to be true, yet because I am also of such a nature that I cannot have my
mind constantly fixed on the same object in order to perceive it clearly,
and as I often recollect having formed a past judgment without at the
same time properly recollecting the reasons that led me to make it, it
may happen meanwhile that other reasons present themselves to me,
which would easily cause me to change my opinion, if I were ignorant
of the facts of the existence of God, and thus I should have no true and
certain knowledge, but only vague and vacillating opinions. Thus, for
example, when I consider the nature of a [rectilinear] triangle, I who
have some little knowledge of the principles of geometry recognize
quite clearly that the three angles are equal to two right angles, and it is
not possible for me not to believe this so long as I apply my mind to its
demonstration; but so soon as I abstain from attending to the proof,
although I still recollect having clearly comprehended it, it may easily
occur that I come to doubt its truth, if I am ignorant of there being a
God. For I can persuade myself of having been so constituted by nature
that I can easily deceive myself even in those matters which I believe
myself to apprehend with the greatest evidence and certainty, especially

when I recollect that I have frequently judged matters to be true and
certain which other reasons have afterwards impelled me to judge to be
altogether false. But after I have recognized that there is a God—because at the
same time I have also recognized that all things depend upon Him, and
that He is not a deceiver, and from that have inferred that what I
perceive clearly and distinctly cannot fail to be true—although I no
longer pay attention to the reasons for which I have judged this to be
true, provided that I recollect having clearly and distinctly perceived it
no contrary reason can be brought forward which could ever cause me
to doubt of its truth; and thus I have a true and certain knowledge of it. And this same knowledge extends likewise to all other things which I
recollect having formerly demonstrated, such as the truths of geometry
and the like; for what can be alleged against them to cause me to place
them in doubt? Will it be said that my nature is such as to cause me to
be frequently deceived? But I already know that I cannot be deceived
in the judgment whose grounds I know clearly. Will it be said that I
formerly held many things to be true and certain which I have
afterwards recognized to be false? But I had not had any clear and
distinct knowledge of these things, and not as yet knowing the rule
whereby I assure myself of the truth, I had been impelled to give my
assent from reasons which I have since recognized to be less strong than
I had at the time imagined them to be. What further objection can then
be raised? That possibly I am dreaming (an objection I myself made a
little while ago), or that all the thoughts which I now have are no more
true than the phantasies of my dreams? But even though I slept the case
would be the same, for all that is clearly present to my mind is
absolutely true. And so I very clearly recognize that the certainty and truth of all
knowledge depends alone on the knowledge of the true God, in so much
that, before I knew Him, I could not have a perfect knowledge of any
other thing. And now that I know Him I have the means of acquiring a
perfect knowledge of an infinitude of things, not only of those which
relate to God Himself and other intellectual matters, but also of those
which pertain to corporeal nature in so far as it is the object of pure
mathematics [which have no concern with whether it exists or not]. 20 “In the idea of whom alone necessary or eternal existence is comprised.”

Meditation VI. Of the Existence of Material Things, and of the real
distinction between the Soul and Body of Man. French version. 21 “From the moment that.” French version. 1-26

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

Nothing further now remains but to inquire whether material things
exist. And certainly I at least know that these may exist in so far as they
are considered as the objects of pure mathematics, since in this aspect I
perceive them clearly and distinctly. For there is no doubt that God
possesses the power to produce everything that I am capable of
perceiving with distinctness, and I have never deemed that anything was
impossible for Him, unless I found a contradiction in attempting to
conceive it clearly. Further, the faculty of imagination which I possess,
and of which, experience tells me, I make use when I apply myself to
the consideration of material things, is capable of persuading me of
their existence; for when I attentively consider what imagination is, I
find that it is nothing but a certain application of the faculty of
knowledge to the body which is immediately present to it, and which
therefore exists. And to render this quite clear, I remark in the first place the
difference that exists between the imagination and pure intellection [or
conception22]. For example, when I imagine a triangle, I do not
conceive it only as a figure comprehended by three lines, but I also
apprehend23 these three lines as present by the power and inward vision
of my mind,24 and this is what I call imagining. But if I desire to think
of a chiliagon, I certainly conceive truly that it is a figure composed of a
thousand sides, just as easily as I conceive of a triangle that it is a figure
of three sides only; but I cannot in any way imagine the thousand sides
of a chiliagon [as I do the three sides of a triangle], nor do I, so to
speak, regard them as present [with the eyes of my mind]. And
although in accordance with the habit I have formed of always
employing the aid of my imagination when I think of corporeal things,
it may happen that in imagining a chiliagon I confusedly represent to
myself some figure, yet it is very evident that this figure is not a
chiliagon, since it in no way differs from that which I represent to
myself when I think of a myriagon or any other many-sided figure; nor
does it serve my purpose in discovering the properties which go to form
the distinction between a chiliagon and other polygons. But if the
question turns upon a pentagon, it is quite true that I can conceive its
figure as well as that of a chiliagon without the help of my imagination;
but I can also imagine it by applying the attention of my mind to each of
its five sides, and at the same time to the space which they enclose. And thus I clearly recognize that I have need of a particular effort of
mind in order to effect the act of imagination, such as I do not require in
order to understand, and this particular effort of mind clearly manifests
the difference which exists between imagination and pure intellection.25
I remark besides that this power of imagination which is in one,
inasmuch as it differs from the power of understanding, is in no wise a
necessary element in my nature, or in [my essence, that is to say, in] the
essence of my mind; for although I did not possess it I should doubtless
ever remain the same as I now am, from which it appears that we might
conclude that it depends on something which differs from me. And I
easily conceive that if some body exists with which my mind is
conjoined and united in such a way that it can apply itself to consider it
when it pleases, it may be that by this means it can imagine corporeal
objects; so that this mode of thinking differs from pure intellection only
inasmuch as mind in its intellectual activity in some manner turns on
itself, and considers some of the ideas which it possesses in itself; while
in imagining it turns towards the body, and there beholds in it
something conformable to the idea which it has either conceived of
itself or perceived by the senses. I easily understand, I say, that the
imagination could be thus constituted if it is true that body exists; and
because I can discover no other convenient mode of explaining it, I
conjecture with probability that body does exist; but this is only with
probability, and although I examine all things with care, I nevertheless
do not find that from this distinct idea of corporeal nature, which I have
in my imagination, I can derive any argument from which there will
necessarily be deduced the existence of body. But I am in the habit of imagining many other things besides this
corporeal nature which is the object of pure mathematics, to wit, the
colours, sounds, scents, pain, and other such things, although less
distinctly. And inasmuch as I perceive these things much better through
the senses, by the medium of which, and by the memory, they seem to
have reached my imagination, I believe that, in order to examine them
more conveniently, it is right that I should at the same time investigate
the nature of sense perception, and that I should see if from the ideas
which I apprehend by this mode of thought, which I call feeling, I
cannot derive some certain proof of the existence of corporeal objects. And first of all I shall recall to my memory those matters which I
hitherto held to be true, as having perceived them through the senses,
and the foundations on which my belief has rested; in the next place I

22 “Conception,” French version. “intellectionem,” Latin version. 23 intueor. 24 acie mentis. 25 intellectionem. 26

1-27

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

shall examine the reasons which have since obliged me to place them in
doubt; in the last place I shall consider which of them I must now
believe. First of all, then, I perceived that I had a head, hands, feet, and all
other members of which this body—which I considered as a part, or
possibly even as the whole, of myself—is composed. Further I was
sensible that this body was placed amidst many others, from which it
was capable of being affected in many different ways, beneficial and
hurtful, and I remarked that a certain feeling of pleasure accompanied
those that were beneficial, and pain those which were harmful. And in
addition to this pleasure and pain, I also experienced hunger, thirst, and
other similar appetites, as also certain corporeal inclinations towards
joy, sadness, anger, and other similar passions. And outside myself, in
addition to extension, figure, and motions of bodies, I remarked in them
hardness, heat, and all other tactile qualities, and, further, light and
colour, and scents and sounds, the variety of which gave me the means
of distinguishing the sky, the earth, the sea, and generally all the other
bodies, one from the other. And certainly, considering the ideas of all
these qualities which presented themselves to my mind, and which
alone I perceived properly or immediately, it was not without reason
that I believed myself to perceive objects quite different from my
thought, to wit, bodies from which those ideas proceeded; for I found
by experience that these ideas presented themselves to me without my
consent being requisite, so that I could not perceive any object,
however desirous I might be, unless it were present to the organs of
sense; and it was not in my power not to perceive it, when it was
present. And because the ideas which I received through the senses
were much more lively, more clear, and even, in their own way, more
distinct than any of those which I could of myself frame in meditation,
or than those I found impressed on my memory, it appeared as though
they could not have proceeded from my mind, so that they must
necessarily have been produced in me by some other things. And
having no knowledge of those objects excepting the knowledge which
the ideas themselves gave me, nothing was more likely to occur to my
mind than that the objects were similar to the ideas which were caused. And because I likewise remembered that I had formerly made use of my
senses rather than my reason, and recognized that the ideas which I
formed of myself were not so distinct as those which I perceived
through the senses, and that they were most frequently even composed
of portions of these last, I persuaded myself easily that I had no idea in
my mind which had not formerly come to me through the senses. Nor

was it without some reason that I believed that this body (which by a
certain special right I call my own) belonged to me more properly and
more strictly than any other; for in fact I could never be separated from
it as from other bodies; I experienced in it and on account of it all my
appetites and affections, and finally I was touched by the feeling of pain
and the titillation of pleasure in its parts, and not in the parts of other
bodies which were separated from it. But when I inquired, why, from
some, I know not what, painful sensation, there follows sadness of
mind, and from the pleasurable sensation there arises joy, or why this
mysterious pinching of the stomach which I call hunger causes me to
desire to eat, and dryness of throat causes a desire to drink, and so on, I
could give no reason excepting that nature taught me so; for there is
certainly no affinity (that I at least can understand) between the craving
of the stomach and the desire to eat, any more than between the
perception of whatever causes pain and the thought of sadness which
arises from this perception. And in the same way it appeared to me that
I had learned from nature all the other judgments which I formed
regarding the objects of my senses, since I remarked that these
judgments were formed in me before I had the leisure to weigh and
consider any reasons which might oblige me to make them. But afterwards many experiences little by little destroyed all the
faith which I had rested in my senses; for I from time to time observed
that those towers which from afar appeared to me to be round, more
closely observed seemed square, and that colossal statues raised on the
summit of these towers, appeared as quite tiny statues when viewed
from the bottom; and so in an infinitude of other cases I found error in
judgments founded on the external senses. And not only in those
founded on the external senses, but even in those founded on the
internal as well; for is there anything more intimate or more internal
than pain? And yet I have learned from some persons whose arms or
legs have been cut off, that they sometimes seemed to feel pain in the
part which had been amputated, which made me think that I could not
be quite certain that it was a certain member which pained me, even
although I felt pain in it. And to those grounds of doubt I have lately
added two others, which are very general; the first is that I never have
believed myself to feel anything in waking moments which I cannot
also sometimes believe myself to feel when I sleep, and as I do not
think that these things which I seem to feel in sleep, proceed from
objects outside of me, I do not see any reason why I should have this
belief regarding objects which I seem to perceive while awake. The
other was that being still ignorant, or rather supposing myself to be

1-28

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

ignorant, of the author of my being, I saw nothing to prevent me from
having been so constituted by nature that I might be deceived even in
matters which seemed to me to be most certain. And as to the grounds
on which I was formerly persuaded of the truth of sensible objects, I
had not much trouble in replying to them. For since nature seemed to
cause me to lean towards many things from which reason repelled me, I
did not believe that I should trust much to the teachings of nature. And
although the ideas which I receive by the senses do not depend on my
will, I did not think that one should for that reason conclude that they
proceeded from things different from myself, since possibly some
faculty might be discovered in me—though hitherto unknown to me—
which produced them. But now that I begin to know myself better, and to discover more
clearly the author of my being, I do not in truth think that I should
rashly admit all the matters which the senses seem to teach us, but, on
the other hand, I do not think that I should doubt them all universally. And first of all, because I know that all things which I apprehend
clearly and distinctly can be created by God as I apprehend them, it
suffices that I am able to apprehend one thing apart from another
clearly and distinctly in order to be certain that the one is different from
the other, since they may be made to exist in separation at least by the
omnipotence of God; and it does not signify by what power this
separation is made in order to compel me to judge them to be different:
and, therefore, just because I know certainly that I exist, and that
meanwhile I do not remark that any other thing necessarily pertains to
my nature or essence, excepting that I am a thinking thing, I rightly
conclude that my essence consists solely in the fact that I am a thinking
thing [or a substance whose whole essence or nature is to think]. And
although possibly (or rather certainly, as I shall say in a moment) I
possess a body with which I am very intimately conjoined, yet because,
on the one side, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself inasmuch as I
am only a thinking and unextended thing, and as, on the other, I possess
a distinct idea of body, inasmuch as it is only an extended and
unthinking thing, it is certain that this I [that is to say, my soul by which
I am what I am], is entirely and absolutely distinct from my body, and
can exist without it. I further find in myself faculties employing modes of thinking
peculiar to themselves, to wit, the faculties of imagination and feeling,
without which I can easily conceive myself clearly and distinctly as a
complete being; while, on the other hand, they cannot be so conceived
apart from me, that is without an intelligent substance in which they

reside, for [in the notion we have of these faculties, or, to use the
language of the Schools] in their formal concept, some kind of
intellection is comprised, from which I infer that they are distinct from
me as its modes are from a thing. I observe also in me some other
faculties such as that of change of position, the assumption of different
figures and such like, which cannot be conceived, any more than can
the preceding, apart from some substance to which they are attached,
and consequently cannot exist without it; but it is very clear that these
faculties, if it be true that they exist, must be attached to some corporeal
or extended substance, and not to an intelligent substance, since in the
clear and distinct conception of these there is some sort of extension
found to be present, but no intellection at all. There is certainly further
in me a certain passive faculty of perception, that is, of receiving and
recognising the ideas of sensible things, but this would be useless to me
[and I could in no way avail myself of it], if there were not either in me
or in some other thing another active faculty capable of forming and
producing these ideas. But this active faculty cannot exist in me
[inasmuch as I am a thing that thinks] seeing that it does not presuppose
thought, and also that those ideas are often produced in me without my
contributing in any way to the same, and often even against my will; it
is thus necessarily the case that the faculty resides in some substance
different from me in which all the reality which is objectively in the
ideas that are produced by this faculty is formally or eminently
contained, as I remarked before. And this substance is either a body,
that is, a corporeal nature in which there is contained formally [and
really] all that which is objectively [and by representation] in those
ideas, or it is God Himself, or some other creature more noble than
body in which that same is contained eminently. But, since God is no
deceiver, it is very manifest that He does not communicate to me these
ideas immediately and by Himself, nor yet by the intervention of some
creature in which their reality is not formally, but only eminently,
contained. For since He has given me no faculty to recognize that this
is the case, but, on the other hand, a very great inclination to believe
[that they are sent to me or] that they are conveyed to me by corporeal
objects, I do not see how He could be defended from the accusation of
deceit if these ideas were produced by causes other than corporeal
objects. Hence we must allow that corporeal things exist. However,
they are perhaps not exactly what we perceive by the senses, since this
comprehension by the senses is in many instances very obscure and
confused; but we must at least admit that all things which I conceive in
them clearly and distinctly, that is to say, all things which, speaking
28

1-29

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

generally, are comprehended in the object of pure mathematics, are
truly to be recognized as external objects. As to other things, however, which are either particular only, as, for
example, that the sun is of such and such a figure, etc., or which are less
clearly and distinctly conceived, such as light, sound, pain and the like,
it is certain that although they are very dubious and uncertain, yet on the
sole ground that God is not a deceiver, and that consequently He has
not permitted any falsity to exist in my opinion which He has not
likewise given me the faculty of correcting, I may assuredly hope to
conclude that I have within me the means of arriving at the truth even
here. And first of all there is no doubt that in all things which nature
teaches me there is some truth contained; for by nature, considered in
general, I now understand no other thing than either God Himself or
else the order and disposition which God has established in created
things; and by my nature in particular I understand no other thing than
the complexus of all the things which God has given me. But there is nothing which this nature teaches me more expressly
[nor more sensibly] than that I have a body which is adversely affected
when I feel pain, which has need of food or drink when I experience the
feelings of hunger and thirst, and so on; nor can I doubt there being
some truth in all this. Nature also teaches me by these sensations of pain, hunger, thirst,
etc., that I am not only lodged in my body as a pilot in a vessel, but that
I am very closely united to it, and so to speak so intermingled with it
that I seem to compose with it one whole. For if that were not the case,
when my body is hurt, I, who am merely a thinking thing, should not
feel pain, for I should perceive this wound by the understanding only,
just as the sailor perceives by sight when something is damaged in his
vessel; and when my body has need of drink or food, I should clearly
understand the fact without being warned of it by confused feelings of
hunger and thirst. For all these sensations of hunger, thirst, pain, etc. are in truth none other than certain confused modes of thought which
are produced by the union and apparent intermingling of mind and
body. Moreover, nature teaches me that many other bodies exist around
mine, of which some are to be avoided, and others sought after. And
certainly from the fact that I am sensible of different sorts of colours,
sounds, scents, tastes, heat, hardness, etc., I very easily conclude that
there are in the bodies from which all these diverse sense-perceptions
proceed certain variations which answer to them, although possibly
these are not really at all similar to them. And also from the fact that

amongst these different sense-perceptions some are very agreeable to
me and others disagreeable, it is quite certain that my body (or rather
myself in my entirety, inasmuch as I am formed of body and soul) may
receive different impressions agreeable and disagreeable from the other
bodies which surround it. But there are many other things which nature seems to have taught
me, but which at the same time I have never really received from her,
but which have been brought about in my mind by a certain habit which
I have of forming inconsiderate judgments on things; and thus it may
easily happen that these judgments contain some error. Take, for
example, the opinion which I hold that all space in which there is
nothing that affects [or makes an impression on] my senses is void; that
in a body which is warm there is something entirely similar to the idea
of heat which is in me; that in a white or green body there is the same
whiteness or greenness that I perceive; that in a bitter or sweet body
there is the same taste, and so on in other instances; that the stars, the
towers, and all other distant bodies are of the same figure and size as
they appear from far off to our eyes, etc. But in order that in this there
should be nothing which I do not conceive distinctly, I should define
exactly what I really understand when I say that I am taught somewhat
by nature. For here I take nature in a more limited signification than
when I term it the sum of all the things given me by God, since in this
sum many things are comprehended which only pertain to mind (and to
these I do not refer in speaking of nature) such as the notion which I
have of the fact that what has once been done cannot ever be undone
and an infinitude of such things which I know by the light of nature
[without the help of the body]; and seeing that it comprehends many
other matters besides which only pertain to body, and are no longer
here contained under the name of nature, such as the quality of weight
which it possesses and the like, with which I also do not deal; for in
talking of nature I only treat of those things given by God to me as a
being composed of mind and body. But the nature here described truly
teaches me to flee from things which cause the sensation of pain, and
seek after the things which communicate to me the sentiment of
pleasure and so forth; but I do not see that beyond this it teaches me
that from those diverse sense-perceptions we should ever form any
conclusion regarding things outside of us, without having [carefully and
maturely] mentally examined them beforehand. For it seems to me that
it is mind alone, and not mind and body in conjunction, that is requisite
to a knowledge of the truth in regard to such things. Thus, although a
star makes no larger an impression on my eye than the flame of a little

1-30

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

candle there is yet in me no real or positive propensity impelling me to
believe that it is not greater than that flame; but I have judged it to be so
from my earliest years, without any rational foundation. And although
in approaching fire I feel heat, and in approaching it a little too near I
even feel pain, there is at the same time no reason in this which could
persuade me that there is in the fire something resembling this heat any
more than there is in it something resembling the pain; all that I have
any reason to believe from this is, that there is something in it, whatever
it may be, which excites in me these sensations of heat or of pain. So
also, although there are spaces in which I find nothing which excites my
senses, I must not from that conclude that these spaces contain no body;
for I see in this, as in other similar things, that I have been in the habit
of perverting the order of nature, because these perceptions of sense
having been placed within me by nature merely for the purpose of
signifying to my mind what things are beneficial or hurtful to the
composite whole of which it forms a part, and being up to that point
sufficiently clear and distinct, I yet avail myself of them as though they
were absolute rules by which I might immediately determine the
essence of the bodies which are outside me, as to which, in fact, they
can teach me nothing but what is most obscure and confused. But I have already sufficiently considered how, notwithstanding the
supreme goodness of God, falsity enters into the judgments I make. Only here a new difficulty is presented—one respecting those things the
pursuit or avoidance of which is taught me by nature, and also
respecting the internal sensations which I possess, and in which I seem
to have sometimes detected error [and thus to be directly deceived by
my own nature]. To take an example, the agreeable taste of some food
in which poison has been intermingled may induce me to partake of the
poison, and thus deceive me. It is true, at the same time, that in this
case nature may be excused, for it only induces me to desire food in
which I find a pleasant taste, and not to desire the poison which is
unknown to it; and thus I can infer nothing from this fact, except that
my nature is not omniscient, at which there is certainly no reason to be
astonished, since man, being finite in nature, can only have knowledge
the perfectness of which is limited. But we not unfrequently deceive ourselves even in those things to
which we are directly impelled by nature, as happens with those who
when they are sick desire to drink or eat things hurtful to them. It will
perhaps be said here that the cause of their deceptiveness is that their
nature is corrupt, but that does not remove the difficulty, because a sick
man is none the less truly God’s creature than he who is in health; and it

is therefore as repugnant to God’s goodness for the one to have a
deceitful nature as it is for the other. And as a clock composed of
wheels and counter-weights no less exactly observes the laws of nature
when it is badly made, and does not show the time properly, than when
it entirely satisfies the wishes of its maker, and as, if I consider the body
of a man as being a sort of machine so built up and composed of nerves,
muscles, veins, blood and skin, that though there were no mind in it at
all, it would not cease to have the same motions as at present, exception
being made of those movements which are due to the direction of the
will, and in consequence depend upon the mind [as opposed to those
which operate by the disposition of its organs], I easily recognize that it
would be as natural to this body, supposing it to be, for example,
dropsical, to suffer the parchedness of the throat which usually signifies
to the mind the feeling of thirst, and to be disposed by this parched
feeling to move the nerves and other parts in the way requisite for
drinking, and thus to augment its malady and do harm to itself, as it is
natural to it, when it has no indisposition, to be impelled to drink for its
good by a similar cause. And although, considering the use to which
the clock has been destined by its maker, I may say that it deflects from
the order of its nature when it does not indicate the hours correctly; and
as, in the same way, considering the machine of the human body as
having been formed by God in order to have in itself all the movements
usually manifested there, I have reason for thinking that it does not
follow the order of nature when, if the throat is dry, drinking does harm
to the conservation of health, nevertheless I recognize at the same time
that this last mode of explaining nature is very different from the other. For this is but a purely verbal characterisation depending entirely on my
thought, which compares a sick man and a badly constructed clock with
the idea which I have of a healthy man and a well made clock, and it is
hence extrinsic to the things to which it is applied; but according to the
other interpretation of the term nature I understand something which is
truly found in things and which is therefore not without some truth. But certainly although in regard to the dropsical body it is only so
to speak to apply an extrinsic term when we say that its nature is
corrupted, inasmuch as apart from the need to drink, the throat is
parched; yet in regard to the composite whole, that is to say, to the mind
or soul united to this body, it is not a purely verbal predicate, but a real
error of nature, for it to have thirst when drinking would be hurtful to it. And thus it still remains to inquire how the goodness of God does not
prevent the nature of man so regarded from being fallacious. In order to begin this examination, then, I here say, in the first
30

1-31

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

place, that there is a great difference between mind and body, inasmuch
as body is by nature always divisible, and the mind is entirely
indivisible. For, as a matter of fact, when I consider the mind, that is to
say, myself inasmuch as I am only a thinking thing, I cannot distinguish
in myself any parts, but apprehend myself to be clearly one and entire;
and although the whole mind seems to be united to the whole body, yet
if a foot, or an arm, or some other part, is separated from my body, I am
aware that nothing has been taken away from my mind. And the
faculties of willing, feeling, conceiving, etc. cannot be properly
speaking said to be its parts, for it is one and the same mind which
employs itself in willing and in feeling and understanding. But it is
quite otherwise with corporeal or extended objects, for there is not one
of these imaginable by me which my mind cannot easily divide into
parts, and which consequently I do not recognize as being divisible; this
would be sufficient to teach me that the mind or soul of man is entirely
different from the body, if I had not already learned it from other
sources. I further notice that the mind does not receive the impressions from
all parts of the body immediately, but only from the brain, or perhaps
even from one of its smallest parts, to wit, from that in which the
common sense26 is said to reside, which, whenever it is disposed in the
same particular way, conveys the same thing to the mind, although
meanwhile the other portions of the body may be differently disposed,
as is testified by innumerable experiments which it is unnecessary here
to recount. I notice, also, that the nature of body is such that none of its parts
can be moved by another part a little way off which cannot also be
moved in the same way by each one of the parts which are between the
two, although this more remote part does not act at all. As, for
example, in the cord ABCD [which is in tension] if we pull the last part
D, the first part A will not be moved in any way differently from what
would be the case if one of the intervening parts B or C were pulled,
and the last part D were to remain unmoved. And in the same way,
when I feel pain in my foot, my knowledge of physics teaches me that
this sensation is communicated by means of nerves dispersed through
the foot, which, being extended like cords from there to the brain, when
they are contracted in the foot, at the same time contract the inmost
portions of the brain which is their extremity and place of origin, and
then excite a certain movement which nature has established in order to

cause the mind to be affected by a sensation of pain represented as
existing in the foot. But because these nerves must pass through the
tibia, the thigh, the loins, the back and the neck, in order to reach from
the leg to the brain, it may happen that although their extremities which
are in the foot are not affected, but only certain ones of their intervening
parts [which pass by the loins or the neck], this action will excite the
same movement in the brain that might have been excited there by a
hurt received in the foot, in consequence of which the mind will
necessarily feel in the foot the same pain as if it had received a hurt. And the same holds good of all the other perceptions of our senses. I notice finally that since each of the movements which are in the
portion of the brain by which the mind is immediately affected brings
about one particular sensation only, we cannot under the circumstances
imagine anything more likely than that this movement, amongst all the
sensations which it is capable of impressing on it, causes mind to be
affected by that one which is best fitted and most generally useful for
the conservation of the human body when it is in health. But
experience makes us aware that all the feelings with which nature
inspires us are such as I have just spoken of; and there is therefore
nothing in them which does not give testimony to the power and
goodness of the God [who has produced them27]. Thus, for example,
when the nerves which are in the feet are violently or more than usually
moved, their movement, passing through the medulla of the spine28 to
the inmost parts of the brain, gives a sign to the mind which makes it
feel somewhat, to wit, pain, as though in the foot, by which the mind is
excited to do its utmost to remove the cause of the evil as dangerous
and hurtful to the foot. It is true that God could have constituted the
nature of man in such a way that this same movement in the brain would
have conveyed something quite different to the mind; for example, it
might have produced consciousness of itself either in so far as it is in
the brain, or as it is in the foot, or as it is in some other place between
the foot and the brain, or it might finally have produced consciousness
of anything else whatsoever; but none of all this would have contributed
so well to the conservation of the body. Similarly, when we desire to
drink, a certain dryness of the throat is produced which moves its
nerves, and by their means the internal portions of the brain; and this
movement causes in the mind the sensation of thirst, because in this
case there is nothing more useful to us than to become aware that we

26 sensus communis. 27 Latin version only. 28 spini dorsae medullam. 1-32

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY

have need to drink for the conservation of our health; and the same
holds good in other instances. From this it is quite clear that, notwithstanding the supreme
goodness of God, the nature of man, inasmuch as it is composed of
mind and body, cannot be otherwise than sometimes a source of
deception. For if there is any cause which excites, not in the foot but in
some part of the nerves which are extended between the foot and the
brain, or even in the brain itself, the same movement which usually is
produced when the foot is detrimentally affected, pain will be
experienced as though it were in the foot, and the sense will thus
naturally be deceived; for since the same movement in the brain is
capable of causing but one sensation in the mind, and this sensation is
much more frequently excited by a cause which hurts the foot than by
another existing in some other quarter, it is reasonable that it should
convey to the mind pain in the foot rather than in any other part of the
body. And although the parchedness of the throat does not always
proceed, as it usually does, from the fact that drinking is necessary for
the health of the body, but sometimes comes from quite a different
cause, as is the case with dropsical patients, it is yet much better that it
should mislead on this occasion than if, on the other hand, it were
always to deceive us when the body is in good health; and so on in
similar cases. And certainly this consideration is of great service to me, not only
in enabling me to recognize all the errors to which my nature is subject,
but also in enabling me to avoid them or to correct them more easily. for knowing that all my senses more frequently indicate to me truth than
falsehood respecting the things which concern that which is beneficial
to the body, and being able almost always to avail myself of many of
them in order to examine one particular thing, and, besides that, being
able to make use of my memory in order to connect the present with the
past, and of my understanding which already has discovered all the
causes of my errors, I ought no longer to fear that falsity may be found
in matters every day presented to me by my senses. And I ought to set
aside all the doubts of these past days as hyperbolical and ridiculous,
particularly that very common uncertainty respecting sleep, which I
could not distinguish from the waking state; for at present I find a very
notable difference between the two, inasmuch as our memory can never
connect our dreams one with the other, or with the whole course of our
lives, as it unites events which happen to us while we are awake. And,
as a matter of fact, if someone, while I was awake, quite suddenly
appeared to me and disappeared as fast as do the images which I see in

sleep, so that I could not know from whence the form came nor whither
it went, it would not be without reason that I should deem it a spectre or
a phantom formed by my brain [and similar to those which I form in
sleep], rather than a real man. But when I perceive things as to which I
know distinctly both the place from which they proceed, and that in
which they are, and the time at which they appeared to me; and when,
without any interruption, I can connect the perceptions which I have of
them with the whole course of my life, I am perfectly assured that these
perceptions occur while I am waking and not during sleep. And I ought
in no wise to doubt the truth of such matters, if, after having called up
all my senses, my memory, and my understanding, to examine them,
nothing is brought to evidence by any one of them which is repugnant
to what is set forth by the others. For because God is in no wise a
deceiver, it follows that I am not deceived in this. But because the
exigencies of action often oblige us to make up our minds before having
leisure to examine matters carefully, we must confess that the life of
man is very frequently subject to error in respect to individual objects,
and we must in the end acknowledge the infirmity of our nature.29

29

Unaltered copies of this computer text file may be freely
distributed for personal and classroom use. Alterations to this file are
permitted only for purposes of computer printouts, although altered
computer text files may not circulate. 32

RENE DESCARTES

MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
33﻿PREFATORY NOTE BY THE AUTHOR

If this Discourse appear too long to be read at once, it may be divided
into six Parts:  and, in the first, will be found various
considerations touching the Sciences; in the second, the principal
rules of the Method which the Author has discovered, in the third,
certain of the rules of Morals which he has deduced from this Method;
in the fourth, the reasonings by which he establishes the existence of
God and of the Human Soul, which are the foundations of his Metaphysic;
in the fifth, the order of the Physical questions which he has
investigated, and, in particular, the explication of the motion of the
heart and of some other difficulties pertaining to Medicine, as also
the difference between the soul of man and that of the brutes; and, in
the last, what the Author believes to be required in order to greater
advancement in the investigation of Nature than has yet been made, with
the reasons that have induced him to write. PART I

Good sense is, of all things among men, the most equally distributed;
for every one thinks himself so abundantly provided with it, that those
even who are the most difficult to satisfy in everything else, do not
usually desire a larger measure of this quality than they already
possess. And in this it is not likely that all are mistaken the
conviction is rather to be held as testifying that the power of judging
aright and of distinguishing truth from error, which is properly what
is called  good sense or reason, is by nature equal in all men; and
that the diversity of our opinions, consequently, does not arise from
some being endowed with a larger share of reason than others, but
solely from this, that we conduct our thoughts along different ways,
and do not fix our attention on the same objects. For to be possessed
of a vigorous mind is not enough; the prime requisite is rightly to
apply it. The greatest minds, as they are capable of the highest
excellences, are open likewise to the greatest aberrations; and those
who travel very slowly may yet make far greater progress, provided they
keep always to the straight road, than those who, while they run,
forsake it. For myself, I have never fancied my mind to be in any respect more
perfect than those of the generality; on the contrary, I have often
wished that I were equal to some others in promptitude of thought, or
in clearness and distinctness of imagination, or in fullness and
readiness of memory. And besides these, I know of no other qualities
that contribute to the perfection of the mind; for as to the reason or
sense, inasmuch as it is that alone which constitutes us men, and
distinguishes us from the brutes, I am disposed to believe that it is
to be found complete in each individual; and on this point to adopt the
common opinion of philosophers, who say that the difference of greater
and less holds only among the accidents, and not among the forms or
natures of individuals of the same species. I will not hesitate, however, to avow my belief that it has been my
singular good  fortune to have very early in life fallen in with
certain tracks which have conducted me to considerations and maxims, of
which I have formed a method that gives me the means, as I think, of
gradually augmenting my knowledge, and of raising it by little and
little to the highest point which the mediocrity of my talents and the
brief duration of my life will permit me to reach. For I have already
reaped from it such fruits that, although I have been accustomed to
think lowly enough of myself, and although when I look with the eye of
a philosopher at the varied courses and pursuits of mankind at large, I
find scarcely one which does not appear in vain and useless, I
nevertheless derive the highest satisfaction from the progress I
conceive myself to have already made in the search after truth, and
cannot help entertaining such expectations of the future as to believe
that if, among the occupations of men as men, there is any one really
excellent and important, it is that which I have chosen. After all, it is possible I may be mistaken; and it is but a little
copper and glass, perhaps, that I take for gold and diamonds. I know
how very liable we are to delusion in what relates to ourselves, and
also how much the judgments of our friends are to be suspected when
given in our favor. But I shall endeavor in this discourse to describe
the paths I have followed, and to delineate my life as in a picture, in
order that each one may also be able to judge of them for himself, and
that in the general opinion entertained of them, as gathered from
current report, I myself may have a new help towards instruction to be
added to those I have been in the habit of employing. My present design, then, is not to teach the method which each ought to
follow for the right conduct of his reason, but solely to describe the
way in which I have endeavored to conduct my own. They who set
themselves to give precepts must of course regard themselves as
possessed of greater skill than those to whom they prescribe; and if
they err in the slightest particular, they subject themselves to
censure. But as this tract is put forth merely as a history, or, if
you will, as a tale, in which, amid some examples worthy of imitation,
there will be found, perhaps, as many more which it were advisable not
to follow, I hope it will prove useful to some without being hurtful to
any, and that my openness will find some favor with all. From my childhood, I have been familiar with letters; and as I was
given to believe that by their help a clear and certain knowledge of
all that is useful in life might be acquired, I was ardently desirous
of instruction. But as soon as I had finished the entire course of
study, at the close of which it is customary to be admitted into the
order of the learned, I completely changed my opinion. For I found
myself involved in so many doubts and errors, that I was convinced I
had advanced no farther in all my attempts at learning, than the
discovery at every turn of my own ignorance. And yet I was studying in
one of the most celebrated schools in Europe, in which I thought there
must be learned men,  if such were anywhere to be found. I had been
taught all that others learned there; and not contented with the
sciences actually taught us, I had, in addition, read all the books
that had fallen into my hands, treating of such branches as are
esteemed the most curious and rare. I knew the judgment which others
had formed of me; and I did not find that I was considered inferior to
my fellows, although there were among them some who were already marked
out to fill the places of our instructors. And, in fine, our age
appeared to me as flourishing, and as fertile in powerful minds as any
preceding one. I was thus led to take the liberty of judging of all
other men by myself, and of concluding that there was no science in
existence that was of such a nature as I had previously been given to
believe. I still continued, however, to hold in esteem the studies of the
schools. I was aware that the languages taught in them are necessary
to the understanding of the writings of the ancients; that the grace of
fable stirs the mind; that the memorable deeds of history elevate it;
and, if read with discretion, aid in forming the judgment; that the
perusal of all excellent books is,  as it were, to interview with the
noblest men of past ages, who have written them, and even a studied
interview, in which are discovered to us only their choicest thoughts;
that eloquence has incomparable force and beauty; that poesy has its
ravishing graces and delights; that in the mathematics there are many
refined discoveries eminently suited to gratify the inquisitive, as
well as further all the arts an lessen the labour of man; that numerous
highly useful precepts and exhortations to virtue are contained in
treatises on morals; that theology points out the path to heaven; that
philosophy affords the means of discoursing with an appearance of truth
on all matters, and commands the admiration of the more simple; that
jurisprudence, medicine, and the other sciences, secure for their
cultivators honors and riches; and, in fine, that it is useful to
bestow some attention upon all, even upon those abounding the most in
superstition and error, that we may be in a position to determine their
real value, and guard against being deceived. But I believed that I had already given sufficient time to languages,
and likewise to the reading of the writings of the ancients, to their
histories and fables. For to hold converse with those of other ages
and to travel, are almost the same thing. It is useful to know
something of the manners of different nations, that we may be enabled
to form a more correct judgment regarding our own, and be prevented
from thinking that everything contrary to our customs is ridiculous and
irrational, a conclusion usually come to by those whose experience has
been limited to their own country. On the other hand, when too much
time is occupied in traveling, we become strangers to our native
country; and the over curious in the customs of the past are generally
ignorant of those of the present. Besides, fictitious narratives lead
us to imagine the possibility of many events that are impossible; and
even the most faithful histories, if they do not wholly misrepresent
matters, or exaggerate their importance to render the account of them
more worthy of perusal, omit, at least, almost always the meanest and
least striking of the attendant circumstances; hence it happens that
the remainder does not represent the truth, and that such as regulate
their conduct by examples drawn from this source, are apt to fall into
the extravagances of the knight-errants of romance, and to entertain
projects that exceed their powers. I esteemed eloquence highly, and was in raptures with poesy; but I
thought that both were gifts of nature rather than fruits of study. Those in whom the faculty of reason is predominant, and who most
skillfully dispose their thoughts with a view to render them clear and
intelligible, are always the best able to persuade others of the truth
of what they lay down, though they should speak only in the language of
Lower Brittany, and be wholly ignorant of the rules of rhetoric; and
those whose minds are stored with the most agreeable fancies, and who
can give expression to them with the greatest embellishment and
harmony, are still the best poets, though unacquainted with the art of
poetry. I was especially delighted with the mathematics, on account of the
certitude and evidence of their reasonings;  but I had not as yet a
precise knowledge of their true use; and thinking that they but
contributed to the advancement of the mechanical arts, I was astonished
that foundations, so strong and solid, should have had no loftier
superstructure reared on them. On the other hand, I compared the
disquisitions of the ancient moralists to very towering and magnificent
palaces with no better foundation than sand and mud:  they laud the
virtues very highly, and exhibit them as estimable far above anything
on earth; but they give us no adequate criterion of virtue, and
frequently that which they designate with so fine a name is but apathy,
or pride, or despair, or parricide. I revered our theology, and aspired as much as any one to reach heaven:
but being given assuredly to understand that the way is not less open
to the most ignorant than to the most learned, and that the revealed
truths which lead to heaven are above our comprehension, I did not
presume to subject them to the impotency of my reason; and I thought
that in order competently to undertake their examination, there was
need of some special help from heaven, and of being more than man. Of philosophy I will say nothing, except that when I saw that it had
been cultivated for many ages by the most distinguished men, and that
yet there is not a single matter within its sphere which is not still
in dispute, and nothing, therefore, which is above doubt, I did not
presume to anticipate that my success would be greater in it than that
of others; and further, when I considered the number of conflicting
opinions touching a single matter that may be upheld by learned men,
while there can be but one true, I reckoned as well-nigh false all that
was only probable. As to the other sciences, inasmuch as these borrow their principles
from philosophy, I judged that no solid superstructures could be reared
on foundations so infirm; and neither the honor nor the gain held out
by them was sufficient to determine me to their cultivation:  for I was
not, thank Heaven, in a condition which compelled me to make
merchandise of science for the bettering of my fortune; and though I
might not profess to scorn glory as a cynic, I yet made very slight
account of that honor which I hoped to acquire only through fictitious
titles. And, in fine, of false sciences I thought I knew the worth
sufficiently to escape being deceived by the professions of an
alchemist, the predictions of an astrologer, the impostures of a
magician, or by the artifices and boasting of any of those who profess
to know things of which they are ignorant. For these reasons, as soon as my age permitted me to pass from under
the control of my instructors, I entirely abandoned the study of
letters, and resolved no longer to seek any other science than the
knowledge of myself, or of the great book of the world. I spent the
remainder of my youth in traveling, in visiting courts and armies, in
holding intercourse with men of different dispositions and ranks, in
collecting varied experience, in proving myself in the different
situations into which fortune threw me, and, above all, in making such
reflection on the matter of my experience as to secure my improvement. For it occurred to me that I should find much more truth in the
reasonings of each individual with reference to the affairs in which he
is personally interested, and the issue of which must presently punish
him if he has judged amiss, than in those conducted by a man of letters
in his study, regarding speculative matters that are of no practical
moment, and followed by no consequences to himself, farther, perhaps,
than that they foster his vanity the better the more remote they are
from common sense; requiring, as they must in this case, the exercise
of greater ingenuity and art to render them probable. In addition, I
had always a most earnest desire to know how to distinguish the true
from the false, in order that I might be able clearly to discriminate
the right path in life, and proceed in it with confidence. It is true that, while busied only in considering the manners of other
men, I found here, too, scarce any ground for settled conviction, and
remarked hardly less contradiction among them than in the opinions of
the philosophers. So that the greatest advantage I derived from the
study consisted in this, that, observing many things which, however
extravagant and ridiculous to our apprehension, are yet by common
consent received and approved by other great nations, I learned to
entertain too decided a belief in regard to nothing of the truth of
which I had been persuaded merely by example and custom; and thus I
gradually extricated myself from many errors powerful enough to darken
our natural intelligence, and incapacitate us in great measure from
listening to reason. But after I had been occupied several years in
thus studying the book of the world, and in essaying to gather some
experience, I at length resolved to make myself an object of study, and
to employ all the powers of my mind in choosing the paths I ought to
follow, an undertaking which was accompanied with greater success than
it would have been had I never quitted my country or my books. PART II

I was then in Germany, attracted thither by the wars in that country,
which have not yet been brought to a termination; and as I was
returning to the army from the coronation of the emperor, the setting
in of winter arrested me in a locality where, as I found no society to
interest me, and was besides fortunately undisturbed by any cares or
passions, I remained the whole day in seclusion, with full opportunity
to occupy my attention with my own thoughts. Of these one of the very
first that occurred to me was, that there is seldom so much perfection
in works composed of many separate parts, upon which different hands
had been employed, as in those completed by a single master. Thus it
is observable that the buildings which a single architect has planned
and executed, are generally more elegant and commodious than those
which several have attempted to improve, by making old walls serve for
purposes for which they were not originally built. Thus also, those
ancient cities which, from being at first only villages, have become,
in course of time, large towns, are usually but ill laid out compared
with the regularity constructed towns which a professional architect
has freely planned on an open plain; so that although the several
buildings of the former may often equal or surpass in beauty those of
the latter, yet when one observes their indiscriminate juxtaposition,
there a large one and here a small, and the consequent crookedness and
irregularity of the streets, one is disposed to allege that chance
rather than any human will guided by reason must have led to such an
arrangement. And if we consider that nevertheless there have been at
all times certain officers whose duty it was to see that private
buildings contributed to public ornament, the difficulty of reaching
high perfection with but the materials of others to operate on, will be
readily acknowledged. In the same way I fancied that those nations
which, starting from a semi-barbarous state and advancing to
civilization by slow degrees, have had their laws successively
determined, and, as it were, forced upon them simply by experience of
the hurtfulness of particular crimes and disputes, would by this
process come to be possessed of less perfect institutions than those
which, from the commencement of their association as communities, have
followed the appointments of some wise legislator. It is thus quite
certain that the constitution of the true religion, the ordinances of
which are derived from God, must be incomparably superior to that of
every other. And, to speak of human affairs, I believe that the
pre-eminence of Sparta was due not to the goodness of each of its laws
in particular, for many of these were very strange, and even opposed to
good morals, but to the circumstance that, originated by a single
individual, they all tended to a single end. In the same way I thought
that the sciences contained in books (such of them at least as are made
up of probable reasonings, without demonstrations), composed as they
are of the opinions of many different individuals massed together, are
farther removed from truth than the simple inferences which a man of
good sense using his natural and unprejudiced judgment draws respecting
the matters of his experience. And because we have all to pass through
a state of infancy to manhood, and have been of necessity, for a length
of time, governed by our desires and preceptors (whose dictates were
frequently conflicting, while neither perhaps always counseled us for
the best), I farther concluded that it is almost impossible that our
judgments can be so correct or solid as they would have been, had our
reason been mature from the moment of our birth, and had we always been
guided by it alone. It is true, however, that it is not customary to pull down all the
houses of a town with the single design of rebuilding them differently,
and thereby rendering the streets more handsome; but it often happens
that a private individual takes down his own with the view of erecting
it anew, and that people are even sometimes constrained to this when
their houses are in danger of falling from age, or when the foundations
are insecure. With this before me by way of example, I was persuaded
that it would indeed be preposterous for a private individual to think
of reforming a state by fundamentally changing it throughout, and
overturning it in order to set it up amended; and the same I thought
was true of any similar project for reforming the body of the sciences,
or the order of teaching them established in the schools:  but as for
the opinions which up to that time I had embraced, I thought that I
could not do better than resolve at once to sweep them wholly away,
that I might afterwards be in a position to admit either others more
correct, or even perhaps the same when they had undergone the scrutiny
of reason. I firmly believed that in this way I should much better
succeed in the conduct of my life, than if I built only upon old
foundations, and leaned upon principles which, in my youth, I had taken
upon trust. For although I recognized various difficulties in this
undertaking, these were not, however, without remedy, nor once to be
compared with such as attend the slightest reformation in public
affairs. Large bodies, if once overthrown, are with great difficulty
set up again, or even kept erect when once seriously shaken, and the
fall of such is always disastrous. Then if there are any imperfections
in the constitutions of states (and that many such exist the diversity
of constitutions is alone sufficient to assure us), custom has without
doubt materially smoothed their inconveniences, and has even managed to
steer altogether clear of, or insensibly corrected a number which
sagacity could not have provided against with equal effect; and, in
fine, the defects are almost always more tolerable than the change
necessary for their removal; in the same manner that highways which
wind among mountains, by being much frequented, become gradually so
smooth and commodious, that it is much better to follow them than to
seek a straighter path by climbing over the tops of rocks and
descending to the bottoms of precipices. Hence it is that I cannot in any degree approve of those restless and
busy meddlers who, called neither by birth nor fortune to take part in
the management of public affairs, are yet always projecting reforms;
and if I thought that this tract contained aught which might justify
the suspicion that I was a victim of such folly, I would by no means
permit its publication. I have never contemplated anything higher than
the reformation of my own opinions, and basing them on a foundation
wholly my own. And although my own satisfaction with my work has led
me to present here a draft of it, I do not by any means therefore
recommend to every one else to make a similar attempt. Those whom God
has endowed with a larger measure of genius will entertain, perhaps,
designs still more exalted; but for the many I am much afraid lest even
the present undertaking be more than they can safely venture to
imitate. The single design to strip one's self of all past beliefs is
one that ought not to be taken by every one. The majority of men is
composed of two classes, for neither of which would this be at all a
befitting resolution:  in the first place, of those who with more than
a due confidence in their own powers, are precipitate in their
judgments and want the patience requisite for orderly and circumspect
thinking; whence it happens, that if men of this class once take the
liberty to doubt of their accustomed opinions, and quit the beaten
highway, they will never be able to thread the byway that would lead
them by a shorter course, and will lose themselves and continue to
wander for life; in the second place, of those who, possessed of
sufficient sense or modesty to determine that there are others who
excel them in the power of discriminating between truth and error, and
by whom they may be instructed, ought rather to content themselves with
the opinions of such than trust for more correct to their own reason. For my own part, I should doubtless have belonged to the latter class,
had I received instruction from but one master, or had I never known
the diversities of opinion that from time immemorial have prevailed
among men of the greatest learning. But I had become aware, even so
early as during my college life, that no opinion, however absurd and
incredible, can be imagined, which has not been maintained by some on
of the philosophers; and afterwards in the course of my travels I
remarked that all those whose opinions are decidedly repugnant to ours
are not in that account barbarians and savages, but on the contrary
that many of these nations make an equally good, if not better, use of
their reason than we do. I took into account also the very different
character which a person brought up from infancy in France or Germany
exhibits, from that which, with the same mind originally, this
individual would have possessed had he lived always among the Chinese
or with savages, and the circumstance that in dress itself the fashion
which pleased us ten years ago, and which may again, perhaps, be
received into favor before ten years have gone, appears to us at this
moment extravagant and ridiculous. I was thus led to infer that the
ground of our opinions is far more custom and example than any certain
knowledge. And, finally, although such be the ground of our opinions,
I remarked that a plurality of suffrages is no guarantee of truth where
it is at all of difficult discovery, as in such cases it is much more
likely that it will be found by one than by many. I could, however,
select from the crowd no one whose opinions seemed worthy of
preference, and thus I found myself constrained, as it were, to use my
own reason in the conduct of my life. But like one walking alone and in the dark, I resolved to proceed so
slowly and with such circumspection, that if I did not advance far, I
would at least guard against falling. I did not even choose to dismiss
summarily any of the opinions that had crept into my belief without
having been introduced by reason, but first of all took sufficient time
carefully to satisfy myself of the general nature of the task I was
setting myself, and ascertain the true method by which to arrive at the
knowledge of whatever lay within the compass of my powers. Among the branches of philosophy, I had, at an earlier period, given
some attention to logic, and among those of the mathematics to
geometrical analysis and algebra,--three arts or sciences which ought,
as I conceived, to contribute something to my design. But, on
examination, I found that, as for logic, its syllogisms and the
majority of its other precepts are of avail--rather in the
communication of what we already know, or even as the art of Lully, in
speaking without judgment of things of which we are ignorant, than in
the investigation of the unknown; and although this science contains
indeed a number of correct and very excellent precepts, there are,
nevertheless, so many others, and these either injurious or
superfluous, mingled with the former, that it is almost quite as
difficult to effect a severance of the true from the false as it is to
extract a Diana or a Minerva from a rough block of marble. Then as to
the analysis of the ancients and the algebra of the moderns, besides
that they embrace only matters highly abstract, and, to appearance, of
no use, the former is so exclusively restricted to the consideration of
figures, that it can exercise the understanding only on condition of
greatly fatiguing the imagination; and, in the latter, there is so
complete a subjection to certain rules and formulas, that there results
an art full of confusion and obscurity calculated to embarrass, instead
of a science fitted to cultivate the mind. By these considerations I
was induced to seek some other method which would comprise the
advantages of the three and be exempt from their defects. And as a
multitude of laws often only hampers justice, so that a state is best
governed when, with few laws, these are rigidly administered; in like
manner, instead of the great number of precepts of which logic is
composed, I believed that the four following would prove perfectly
sufficient for me, provided I took the firm and unwavering resolution
never in a single instance to fail in observing them. The first was never to accept anything for true which I did not clearly
know to be such; that is to say, carefully to avoid precipitancy and
prejudice, and to comprise nothing more in my judgement than what was
presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly as to exclude all ground
of doubt. The second, to divide each of the difficulties under examination into
as many parts as possible, and as might be necessary for its adequate
solution. The third, to conduct my thoughts in such order that, by commencing
with objects the simplest and easiest to know, I might ascend by little
and little, and, as it were, step by step, to the knowledge of the more
complex; assigning in thought a certain order even to those objects
which in their own nature do not stand in a relation of antecedence and
sequence. And the last, in every case to make enumerations so complete, and
reviews so general, that I might be assured that nothing was omitted. The long chains of simple and easy reasonings by means of which
geometers are accustomed to reach the conclusions of their most
difficult demonstrations, had led me to imagine that all things, to the
knowledge of which man is competent, are mutually connected in the same
way, and that there is nothing so far removed from us as to be beyond
our reach, or so hidden that we cannot discover it, provided only we
abstain from accepting the false for the true, and always preserve in
our thoughts the order necessary for the deduction of one truth from
another. And I had little difficulty in determining the objects with
which it was necessary to commence, for I was already persuaded that it
must be with the simplest and easiest to know, and, considering that of
all those who have hitherto sought truth in the sciences, the
mathematicians alone have been able to find any demonstrations, that
is, any certain and evident reasons, I did not doubt but that such must
have been the rule of their investigations. I resolved to commence,
therefore, with the examination of the simplest objects, not
anticipating, however, from this any other advantage than that to be
found in accustoming my mind to the love and nourishment of truth, and
to a distaste for all such reasonings as were unsound. But I had no
intention on that account of attempting to master all the particular
sciences commonly denominated mathematics:  but observing that, however
different their objects, they all agree in considering only the various
relations or proportions subsisting among those objects, I thought it
best for my purpose to consider these proportions in the most general
form possible, without referring them to any objects in particular,
except such as would most facilitate the knowledge of them, and without
by any means restricting them to these, that afterwards I might thus be
the better able to apply them to every other class of objects to which
they are legitimately applicable. Perceiving further, that in order to
understand these relations I should sometimes have to consider them one
by one and sometimes only to bear them in mind, or embrace them in the
aggregate, I thought that, in order the better to consider them
individually, I should view them as subsisting between straight lines,
than which I could find no objects more simple, or capable of being
more distinctly represented to my imagination and senses; and on the
other hand, that in order to retain them in the memory or embrace an
aggregate of many, I should express them by certain characters the
briefest possible. In this way I believed that I could borrow all that
was best both in geometrical analysis and in algebra, and correct all
the defects of the one by help of the other. And, in point of fact, the accurate observance of these few precepts
gave me, I take the liberty of saying, such ease in unraveling all the
questions embraced in these two sciences, that in the two or three
months I devoted to their examination, not only did I reach solutions
of questions I had formerly deemed exceedingly difficult but even as
regards questions of the solution of which I continued ignorant, I was
enabled, as it appeared to me, to determine the means whereby, and the
extent to which a solution was possible; results attributable to the
circumstance that I commenced with the simplest and most general
truths, and that thus each truth discovered was a rule available in the
discovery of subsequent ones Nor in this perhaps shall I appear too
vain, if it be considered that, as the truth on any particular point is
one whoever apprehends the truth, knows all that on that  point can be
known. The child, for example, who has been instructed in the elements
of arithmetic, and has made a particular addition, according to rule,
may be assured that he has found, with respect to the sum of the
numbers before him, and that in this instance is within the reach of
human genius. Now, in conclusion, the method which teaches adherence
to the true order, and an exact enumeration of all the conditions of
the thing sought includes all that gives certitude to the rules of
arithmetic. But the chief ground of my satisfaction with thus method, was the
assurance I had of thereby exercising my reason in all matters, if not
with absolute perfection, at least with the greatest attainable by me:
besides, I was conscious that by its use my mind was becoming gradually
habituated to clearer and more distinct conceptions of its objects; and
I hoped also, from not having restricted this method to any particular
matter, to apply it to the difficulties of the other sciences, with not
less success than to those of algebra. I should not, however, on this
account have ventured at once on the examination of all the
difficulties of the sciences which presented themselves to me, for this
would have been contrary to the order prescribed in the method, but
observing that the knowledge of such is dependent on principles
borrowed from philosophy, in which I found nothing certain, I thought
it necessary first of all to endeavor to establish its principles. And
because I observed, besides, that an inquiry of this kind was of all
others of the greatest moment, and one in which precipitancy and
anticipation in judgment were most to be dreaded, I thought that I
ought not to approach it till I had reached a more mature age (being at
that time but twenty-three), and had first of all employed much of my
time in preparation for the work, as well by eradicating from my mind
all the erroneous opinions I had up to that moment accepted, as by
amassing variety of experience to afford materials for my reasonings,
and by continually exercising myself in my chosen method with a view to
increased skill in its application. PART III

And finally, as it is not enough, before commencing to rebuild the
house in which we live, that it be pulled down, and materials and
builders provided, or that we engage in the work ourselves, according
to a plan which we have beforehand carefully drawn out, but as it is
likewise necessary that we be furnished with some other house in which
we may live commodiously during the operations, so that I might not
remain irresolute in my actions, while my reason compelled me to
suspend my judgement, and that I might not be prevented from living
thenceforward in the greatest possible felicity, I formed a provisory
code of morals, composed of three or four maxims, with which I am
desirous to make you acquainted. The first was to obey the laws and customs of my country, adhering
firmly to the faith in which, by the grace of God, I had been educated
from my childhood and regulating my conduct in every other matter
according to the most moderate opinions, and the farthest removed from
extremes, which should happen to be adopted in practice with general
consent of the most judicious of those among whom I might be living. For as I had from that time begun to hold my own opinions for nought
because I wished to subject them all to examination, I was convinced
that I could not do better than follow in the meantime the opinions of
the most judicious; and although there are some perhaps among the
Persians and Chinese as judicious as among ourselves, expediency seemed
to dictate that I should regulate my practice conformably to the
opinions of those with whom I should have to live; and it appeared to
me that, in order to ascertain the real opinions of such, I ought
rather to take cognizance of what they practised than of what they
said, not only because, in the corruption of our manners, there are few
disposed to speak exactly as they believe, but also because very many
are not aware of what it is that they really believe; for, as the act
of mind by which a thing is believed is different from that by which we
know that we believe it, the one act is often found without the other. Also, amid many opinions held in equal repute, I chose always the most
moderate, as much for the reason that these are always the most
convenient for practice, and probably the best (for all excess is
generally vicious), as that, in the event of my falling into error, I
might be at less distance from the truth than if, having chosen one of
the extremes, it should turn out to be the other which I ought to have
adopted. And I placed in the class of extremes especially all promises
by which somewhat of our freedom is abridged; not that I disapproved of
the laws which, to provide against the instability of men of feeble
resolution, when what is sought to be accomplished is some good, permit
engagements by vows and contracts binding the parties to persevere in
it, or even, for the security of commerce, sanction similar engagements
where the purpose sought to be realized is indifferent:  but because I
did not find anything on earth which was wholly superior to change, and
because, for myself in particular, I hoped gradually to perfect my
judgments, and not to suffer them to deteriorate, I would have deemed
it a grave sin against good sense, if, for the reason that I approved
of something at a particular time, I therefore bound myself to hold it
for good at a subsequent time, when perhaps it had ceased to be so, or
I had ceased to esteem it such. My second maxim was to be as firm and resolute in my actions as I was
able, and not to adhere less steadfastly to the most doubtful opinions,
when once adopted, than if they had been highly certain; imitating in
this the example of travelers who, when they have lost their way in a
forest, ought not to wander from side to side, far less remain in one
place, but proceed constantly towards the same side in as straight a
line as possible, without changing their direction for slight reasons,
although perhaps it might be chance alone which at first determined the
selection; for in this way, if they do not exactly reach the point they
desire, they will come at least in the end to some place that will
probably be preferable to the middle of a forest. In the same way,
since in action it frequently happens that no delay is permissible, it
is very certain that, when it is not in our power to determine what is
true, we ought to act according to what is most probable; and even
although we should not remark a greater probability in one opinion than
in another, we ought notwithstanding to choose one or the other, and
afterwards consider it, in so far as it relates to practice, as no
longer dubious, but manifestly true and certain,  since the reason by
which our choice has been determined  is itself possessed of these
qualities. This principle was sufficient thenceforward to rid me of
all those repentings and pangs of remorse that usually disturb the
consciences of such feeble and uncertain minds as, destitute of any
clear and determinate principle of choice, allow themselves one day to
adopt a course of action as the best, which they abandon the next, as
the opposite. My third maxim was to endeavor always to conquer myself rather than
fortune, and change my desires rather than the order of the world, and
in general, accustom  myself to the persuasion that, except our own
thoughts, there is nothing absolutely in our power; so that when we
have done our best in things external to us, all wherein we fail of
success is to be held, as regards us, absolutely impossible:  and this
single principle seemed to me sufficient to prevent me from desiring
for the future anything which I could not obtain, and thus render me
contented; for since our will naturally seeks those objects alone which
the understanding represents as in some way possible of attainment, it
is plain, that if we consider all external goods as equally beyond our
power, we shall no more regret the absence of such goods as seem due to
our birth, when deprived of them without any fault of ours,  than our
not possessing the kingdoms of China or Mexico, and thus making, so to
speak, a virtue of necessity, we shall no more desire health in
disease, or freedom in imprisonment, than we now do bodies
incorruptible as diamonds, or the wings of birds to fly with. But I
confess there is need of prolonged discipline and frequently repeated
meditation to accustom the mind to view all objects in this light; and
I believe that in this chiefly consisted the secret of the power of
such philosophers as in former times were enabled to rise superior to
the influence of fortune, and, amid suffering and poverty, enjoy a
happiness which their gods might have envied. For, occupied
incessantly with the consideration of the limits prescribed to their
power by nature, they became so entirely convinced that nothing was at
their disposal except their own thoughts, that this conviction was of
itself sufficient to prevent their entertaining any desire of other
objects; and over their thoughts they acquired a sway so absolute, that
they had some ground on this account for esteeming themselves more rich
and more powerful, more free and more happy, than other men who,
whatever be the favors heaped on them by nature and fortune, if
destitute of this philosophy, can never command the realization of all
their desires. In fine, to conclude this code of morals, I thought of reviewing the
different occupations of men in this life, with the view of making
choice of the best. And, without wishing to offer any remarks on the
employments of others, I may state that it was my conviction that I
could not do better than continue in that in which I was engaged, viz.,
in devoting my whole life to the culture of my reason, and in making
the greatest progress I was able in the knowledge of truth, on the
principles of the method which I had prescribed to myself. This
method, from the time I had begun to apply it, had been to me the
source of satisfaction so intense as to lead me to, believe that more
perfect or more innocent could not be enjoyed in this life; and as by
its means I daily discovered truths that appeared to me of some
importance, and of which other men were generally ignorant, the
gratification thence arising so occupied my mind that I was wholly
indifferent to every other object. Besides, the three preceding maxims
were founded singly on the design of continuing the work of
self-instruction. For since God has endowed each of us with some light
of reason by which to distinguish truth from error, I could not have
believed that I ought for a single moment to rest satisfied with the
opinions of another, unless I had resolved to exercise my own judgment
in examining these whenever I should be duly qualified for the task. Nor could I have proceeded on such opinions without scruple, had I
supposed that I should thereby forfeit any advantage for attaining
still more accurate, should such exist. And, in fine, I could not have
restrained my desires, nor remained satisfied had I not followed a path
in which I thought myself certain of attaining all the knowledge to the
acquisition of which I was competent, as well as the largest amount of
what is truly good which I could ever hope to secure Inasmuch as we
neither seek nor shun any object except in so far as our understanding
represents it as good or bad, all that is necessary to right action is
right judgment, and to the best action the most correct judgment, that
is, to the acquisition of all the virtues with all else that is truly
valuable and within our reach; and the assurance of such an acquisition
cannot fail to render us contented. Having thus provided myself with these maxims, and having placed them
in reserve along with the truths of  faith, which have ever occupied
the first place in my  belief, I came to the conclusion that I might
with freedom set about ridding myself of what remained of my opinions. And, inasmuch as I hoped to be better able successfully to accomplish
this work by holding intercourse with mankind, than by remaining longer
shut up in the retirement where these thoughts had occurred to me, I
betook me again to traveling before the winter was well ended. And,
during the nine subsequent years, I did nothing but roam from one place
to another, desirous of being a  spectator rather than an actor in the
plays exhibited on the theater of the world; and, as I made it my
business in each matter to reflect particularly upon what might fairly
be doubted and prove a source of error, I gradually rooted out from my
mind all the errors which had hitherto crept into it. Not that in this
I imitated the sceptics who doubt only that they may doubt, and seek
nothing beyond uncertainty itself; for, on the contrary, my design  was
singly to find ground of assurance, and cast aside the  loose earth and
sand, that I might reach the rock or the clay. In this, as appears to
me, I was successful enough; for, since I endeavored to discover the
falsehood or incertitude of the propositions I examined, not by feeble
conjectures, but by clear and certain reasonings, I met with nothing so
doubtful as not to yield some conclusion of adequate certainty,
although this were merely the inference, that the matter in question
contained nothing certain. And, just as in pulling down an old house,
we usually reserve the ruins to contribute towards the erection, so, in
destroying such of my opinions as I judged to be Ill-founded, I made a
variety of observations and acquired an amount of experience of which I
availed myself in the establishment of more certain. And further, I
continued to exercise myself in the method I had prescribed; for,
besides taking care in general to conduct all my thoughts according to
its rules, I reserved some hours from time to time which I expressly
devoted to the employment of the method in the solution of mathematical
difficulties, or even in the solution likewise of some questions
belonging to other sciences, but which, by my having detached them from
such principles of these sciences as were of inadequate certainty, were
rendered almost mathematical:  the truth of this will be manifest from
the numerous examples contained in this volume. And thus, without in
appearance living otherwise than those who, with no other occupation
than that of spending their lives agreeably and innocently, study to
sever pleasure from vice, and who, that they may enjoy their leisure
without ennui, have recourse to such pursuits as are honorable, I was
nevertheless prosecuting my design, and making greater progress in the
knowledge of truth, than I might, perhaps, have made had I been engaged
in the perusal of books merely, or in holding converse with men of
letters. These nine years passed away, however, before I had come to any
determinate judgment respecting the difficulties which form matter of
dispute among the learned, or had commenced to seek the principles of
any philosophy more certain than the vulgar. And the examples of many
men of the highest genius, who had, in former times, engaged in this
inquiry, but, as appeared to me, without success, led me to imagine it
to be a work of so much difficulty, that I would not perhaps have
ventured on it so soon had I not heard it currently  rumored that I had
already completed the inquiry. I know not what were the grounds of
this opinion; and, if my conversation contributed in any measure to its
rise, this must have happened rather from my having confessed my
Ignorance with greater freedom than those are accustomed to do who have
studied a little, and expounded perhaps, the reasons that led me to
doubt of many of those things that by others are esteemed certain, than
from my having boasted of any system of philosophy. But, as I am of a
disposition that makes me unwilling to be esteemed different from what
I really am, I thought it necessary to endeavor by all means to render
myself worthy of the reputation accorded to me; and it is now exactly
eight years since this desire constrained me to remove from all those
places where interruption from any of my acquaintances was possible,
and betake myself to this country, in which the long duration of the
war has led to the establishment of such discipline, that the armies
maintained seem to be of use only in enabling the inhabitants to enjoy
more securely the blessings of peace and where, in the midst of a great
crowd actively engaged in business, and more careful of their own
affairs than curious about those of others, I have been enabled to live
without being deprived of any of the conveniences to be had in the most
populous cities, and yet as solitary and as retired as in the midst of
the most remote deserts. PART IV

I am in doubt as to the propriety of making my first meditations in the
place above mentioned matter of discourse; for these are so
metaphysical, and so uncommon, as not, perhaps, to be acceptable to
every one. And yet, that it may be determined whether the foundations
that I have laid are sufficiently secure, I find myself in a measure
constrained to advert to them. I had long before remarked that, in
relation to practice, it is sometimes necessary to adopt, as if above
doubt, opinions which we discern to be highly uncertain, as has been
already said; but as I then desired to give my attention solely to the
search after truth, I thought that a procedure exactly the opposite was
called for, and that I ought to reject as absolutely false all opinions
in regard to which I could suppose the least ground for doubt, in order
to ascertain whether after that there remained aught in my belief that
was wholly indubitable. Accordingly, seeing that our senses sometimes
deceive us, I was willing to suppose that there existed nothing really
such as they presented to us; and because some men err in reasoning,
and fall into paralogisms, even on the simplest matters of geometry, I,
convinced that I was as open to error as any other, rejected as false
all the reasonings I had hitherto taken for demonstrations; and
finally, when I considered that the very same thoughts (presentations)
which we experience when awake may also be experienced when we are
asleep, while there is at that time not one of them true, I supposed
that all the objects (presentations) that had ever entered into my mind
when awake, had in them no more truth than the illusions of my dreams. But immediately upon this I observed that, whilst I thus wished to
think that all was false, it was absolutely necessary that I, who thus
thought, should be somewhat; and as I observed that this truth, I
think, therefore I am (COGITO ERGO SUM), was so certain and of such
evidence that no ground of doubt, however extravagant, could be alleged
by the sceptics capable of shaking it, I concluded that I might,
without scruple, accept it as the first principle of the philosophy of
which I was in search. In the next place, I attentively examined what I was and as I observed
that I could suppose that I had no body, and that there was no world
nor any place in which I might be; but that I could not therefore
suppose that I was not; and that, on the contrary, from the very
circumstance that I thought to doubt of the truth of other things, it
most clearly and certainly followed that I was; while, on the other
hand, if I had only ceased to think, although all the other objects
which I had ever imagined had been in reality existent, I would have
had no reason to believe that I existed; I thence concluded that I was
a substance whose whole essence or nature consists only in thinking,
and which, that it may exist, has need of no place, nor is dependent on
any material thing; so that "I," that is to say, the mind by which I am
what I am, is wholly distinct from the body, and is  even more easily
known than the latter, and is such, that although the latter were not,
it would still continue to be all that it is. After this I inquired in general into what is essential to the truth
and certainty of a proposition; for since I had discovered one which I
knew to be true, I thought that I must likewise be able to discover the
ground of this certitude. And as I observed that in the words I think,
therefore I am, there is nothing at all which gives me assurance of
their truth beyond this, that I see very clearly that in order to think
it is necessary to exist, I concluded that I might take, as a general
rule, the principle, that all the things which we very clearly and
distinctly conceive are true, only observing, however, that there is
some difficulty in rightly determining the objects which we distinctly
conceive. In the next place, from reflecting on the circumstance that I doubted,
and that consequently my being was not wholly perfect (for I clearly
saw that it was a greater perfection to know than to doubt), I was led
to inquire whence I had learned to think of something more perfect than
myself; and I clearly recognized that I must hold this notion from some
nature which in reality was more perfect. As for the thoughts of many
other objects external to me, as of the sky, the earth, light, heat,
and a thousand more, I was less at a loss to know whence these came;
for since I remarked in them nothing which seemed to render them
superior to myself, I could believe that, if these were true, they were
dependencies on my own nature, in so far as it possessed a certain
perfection, and, if they were false, that I held them from nothing,
that is to say, that they were in me because of a certain imperfection
of my nature. But this could not be the case with-the idea of a nature
more perfect than myself; for to receive it from nothing was a thing
manifestly impossible; and, because it is not less repugnant that the
more perfect should be an effect of, and dependence on the less
perfect, than that something should proceed from nothing, it was
equally impossible that I could hold it from myself: accordingly, it
but remained that it had been placed in me by a nature which was in
reality more perfect than mine, and which even possessed within itself
all the perfections of which I could form any idea; that is to say, in
a single word, which was God. And to this I added that, since I knew
some perfections which I did not possess, I was not the only being in
existence (I will here, with your permission, freely use the terms of
the schools); but, on the contrary, that there was of necessity some
other more perfect Being upon whom I was dependent, and from whom I had
received all that I possessed; for if I had existed alone, and
independently of every other being, so as to have had from myself all
the perfection, however little, which I actually possessed, I should
have been able, for the same reason, to have had from myself the whole
remainder of perfection, of the want of which I was conscious, and thus
could of myself have become infinite, eternal, immutable, omniscient,
all-powerful, and, in fine, have possessed all the perfections which I
could recognize in God. For in order to know the nature of God (whose
existence has been established by the preceding reasonings), as far as
my own nature permitted, I had only to consider in reference to all the
properties of which I found in my  mind some idea, whether their
possession was a mark of perfection; and I was assured that no one
which indicated any imperfection was in him, and that none of the rest
was awanting. Thus I perceived that doubt, inconstancy,  sadness, and
such like, could not be found in God, since I myself would have been
happy to be free from them. Besides, I had ideas of many sensible and
corporeal things; for although I might suppose that I was dreaming, and
that all which I saw or imagined was false, I could not, nevertheless,
deny that the ideas were in reality in my thoughts. But, because I had
already very clearly recognized in myself that the intelligent nature
is distinct from the corporeal, and as I observed that all composition
is an evidence of dependency, and that a state of dependency is
manifestly a state of imperfection, I therefore determined that it
could not be a perfection in God to be compounded of these two natures
and that consequently he was not so compounded; but that if there were
any bodies in the world, or even any intelligences, or other natures
that were not wholly perfect, their existence depended on his power in
such a way that they could not subsist without him for a single moment. I was disposed straightway to search for other truths and when I had
represented to myself the object of the geometers, which I conceived to
be a continuous body or a space indefinitely extended in length,
breadth, and height or depth, divisible into divers parts which admit
of different figures and sizes, and of being moved or transposed in all
manner of ways (for all this the geometers suppose to be in the object
they contemplate), I went over some of their simplest demonstrations. And, in the first place, I observed, that the great certitude which by
common consent is accorded to these demonstrations, is founded solely
upon this, that they are clearly conceived in accordance with the rules
I have already laid down In the next place, I perceived that there was
nothing at all in these demonstrations which could assure me of the
existence of their object: thus, for example, supposing a triangle to
be given, I distinctly perceived that its three angles were necessarily
equal to two right angles, but I did not on that account perceive
anything which could assure me that any triangle existed:  while, on
the contrary, recurring to the examination of the idea of a Perfect
Being, I found that the existence of the Being was comprised in the
idea in the same way that the equality of its three angles to two right
angles is comprised in the idea of a triangle, or as in the idea of a
sphere, the equidistance of all points on its surface from the center,
or even still more clearly; and that consequently it is at least as
certain that God, who is this Perfect Being, is, or exists, as any
demonstration of geometry can be. But the reason which leads many to persuade them selves that there is a
difficulty in knowing this truth, and even also in knowing what their
mind really is, is that they never raise their thoughts above sensible
objects, and are so accustomed to consider nothing except by way of
imagination, which is a mode of thinking limited to material objects,
that all that is not imaginable seems to them not intelligible. The
truth of this is sufficiently manifest from the single circumstance,
that the philosophers of the schools accept as a maxim that there is
nothing in the understanding which was not previously in the senses, in
which however it is certain that the ideas of God and of the soul have
never been; and it appears to me that they who make use of their
imagination to comprehend these ideas do exactly the some thing as if,
in order to hear sounds or smell odors, they strove to avail themselves
of their eyes; unless indeed that there is this difference, that the
sense of sight does not afford us an inferior assurance to those of
smell or hearing; in place of which, neither our imagination nor our
senses can give us assurance of anything unless our understanding
intervene. Finally, if there be still persons who are not sufficiently persuaded
of the existence of God and of the soul, by the reasons I have adduced,
I am desirous that they should know that all the other propositions, of
the truth of which they deem themselves perhaps more assured, as that
we have a body, and that there exist stars and an earth, and such like,
are less certain; for, although we have a moral assurance of these
things, which is so strong that there is an appearance of extravagance
in doubting of their existence, yet at the same time no one, unless his
intellect is impaired, can deny, when the question relates to a
metaphysical certitude, that there is sufficient reason to exclude
entire assurance, in the observation that when asleep we can in the
same way imagine ourselves possessed of another body and that we see
other stars and another earth, when there is nothing of the kind. For
how do we know that the thoughts which occur in dreaming are false
rather than those other which we experience when awake, since the
former are often not less vivid and distinct than the latter? And
though men of the highest genius study this question as long as they
please, I do not believe that they will be able to give any reason
which can be sufficient to remove this doubt, unless they presuppose
the existence of God. For, in the first place even the principle which
I have already taken as a rule, viz., that all the things which we
clearly and distinctly conceive are true, is certain only because God
is or exists and because he is a Perfect Being, and because all that we
possess is derived from him:  whence it follows that our ideas or
notions, which to the extent of their clearness and distinctness are
real, and proceed from God, must to that extent be true. Accordingly,
whereas we not infrequently have ideas or notions in which some falsity
is contained, this can only be the case with such as are to some extent
confused and obscure, and in this proceed from nothing (participate of
negation), that is, exist in us thus confused because we are not wholly
perfect. And it is evident that it is not less repugnant that falsity
or imperfection, in so far as it is imperfection, should proceed from
God, than that truth or perfection should proceed from nothing. But if
we did not know that all which we possess of real and true proceeds
from a Perfect and Infinite Being, however clear and distinct our ideas
might be, we should have no ground on that account for the assurance
that they possessed the perfection of being true. But after the knowledge of God and of the soul has rendered us certain
of this rule, we can easily understand that the truth of the thoughts
we experience when awake, ought not in the slightest degree to be
called in question on account of the illusions of our dreams. For if
it happened that an individual, even when asleep, had some very
distinct idea, as, for example, if a geometer should discover some new
demonstration, the circumstance of his being asleep would not militate
against its truth; and as for the most ordinary error of our dreams,
which consists in their representing to us various objects in the same
way as our external senses, this is not prejudicial, since it leads us
very properly to suspect the truth of the ideas of sense; for we are
not infrequently deceived in the same manner when awake; as when
persons in the jaundice see all objects yellow, or when the stars or
bodies at a great distance appear to us much smaller than they are. For, in fine, whether awake or asleep, we ought never to allow
ourselves to be persuaded of the truth of anything unless on the
evidence of our reason. And it must be noted that I say of our reason,
and not of our imagination or of our senses:  thus, for example,
although we very clearly see the sun, we ought not therefore to
determine that it is only of the size which our sense of sight
presents; and we may very distinctly imagine the head of a lion joined
to the body of a goat, without being therefore shut up to the
conclusion that a chimaera exists; for it is not a dictate of reason
that what we thus see or imagine is in reality existent; but it plainly
tells us that all our ideas or notions contain in them some truth; for
otherwise it could not be that God, who is wholly perfect and
veracious, should have placed them in us. And because our reasonings
are never so clear or so complete during sleep as when we are awake,
although sometimes the acts of our imagination are then as lively and
distinct, if not more so than in our waking moments, reason further
dictates that, since all our thoughts cannot be true because of our
partial imperfection, those possessing truth must infallibly be found
in the experience of our waking moments rather than in that of our
dreams. PART V

I would here willingly have proceeded to exhibit the whole chain of
truths which I deduced from these primary but as with a view to this it
would have been necessary now to treat of many questions in dispute
among the earned, with whom I do not wish to be embroiled, I believe
that it will be better for me to refrain from this exposition, and only
mention in general what these truths are, that the more judicious may
be able to determine whether a more special account of them would
conduce to the public advantage. I have ever remained firm in my
original resolution to suppose no other principle than that of which I
have recently availed myself in demonstrating the existence of God and
of the soul, and to accept as true nothing that did not appear to me
more clear and certain than the demonstrations of the geometers had
formerly appeared; and yet I venture to state that not only have I
found means to satisfy myself in a short time on all the principal
difficulties which are usually treated of in philosophy, but I have
also observed certain laws established in nature by God in such a
manner, and of which he has impressed on our minds such notions, that
after we have reflected sufficiently upon these, we cannot doubt that
they are accurately observed in all that exists or takes place in the
world and farther, by considering the concatenation of these laws, it
appears to me that I have discovered many truths more useful and more
important than all I had before learned, or even had expected to learn. But because I have essayed to expound the chief of these discoveries in
a treatise which certain considerations prevent me from publishing, I
cannot make the results known more conveniently than by here giving a
summary of the contents of this treatise. It was my design to comprise
in it all that, before I set myself to write it, I thought I knew of
the nature of material objects. But like the painters who, finding
themselves unable to represent equally well on a plain surface all the
different faces of a solid body, select one of the chief, on which
alone they make the light fall, and throwing the rest into the shade,
allow them to appear only in so far as they can be seen while looking
at the principal one; so, fearing lest I should not be able to compense
in my discourse all that was in my mind, I resolved to expound singly,
though at considerable length, my opinions regarding light; then to
take the opportunity of adding something on the sun and the fixed
stars, since light almost wholly proceeds from them; on the heavens
since they transmit it; on the planets, comets, and earth, since they
reflect it; and particularly on all the bodies that are upon the earth,
since they are either colored, or transparent, or luminous; and finally
on man, since he is the spectator of these objects. Further, to enable
me to cast this variety of subjects somewhat into the shade, and to
express my judgment regarding them with greater freedom, without being
necessitated to adopt or refute the opinions of the learned, I resolved
to leave all the people here to their disputes, and to speak only of
what would happen in a new world, if God were now to create somewhere
in the imaginary spaces matter sufficient to compose one, and were to
agitate variously and confusedly the different parts of this matter, so
that there resulted a chaos as disordered as the poets ever feigned,
and after that did nothing more than lend his ordinary concurrence to
nature, and allow her to act in accordance with the laws which he had
established. On this supposition, I, in the first place, described
this matter, and essayed to represent it in such a manner that to my
mind there can be nothing clearer and more intelligible, except what
has been recently said regarding God and the soul; for I even expressly
supposed that it possessed none of those forms or qualities which are
so debated in the schools, nor in general anything the knowledge of
which is not so natural to our minds that no one can so much as imagine
himself ignorant of it. Besides, I have pointed out what are the laws
of nature; and, with no other principle upon which to found my
reasonings except the infinite perfection of God, I endeavored to
demonstrate all those about which there could be any room for doubt,
and to prove that they are such, that even if God had created more
worlds, there could have been none in which these laws were not
observed. Thereafter, I showed how the greatest part of the matter of
this chaos must, in accordance with these laws, dispose and arrange
itself in such a way as to present the appearance of heavens; how in
the meantime some of its parts must compose an earth and some planets
and comets, and others a sun and fixed stars. And, making a digression
at this stage on the subject of light, I expounded at considerable
length what the nature of that light must be which is found in the sun
and the stars, and how thence in an instant of time it traverses the
immense spaces of the heavens, and how from the planets and comets it
is reflected towards the earth. To this I likewise added much
respecting the substance, the situation, the motions, and all the
different qualities of these heavens and stars; so that I thought I had
said enough respecting them to show that there is nothing observable in
the heavens or stars of our system that must not, or at least may not
appear precisely alike in those of the system which I described. I
came next to speak of the earth in particular, and to show how, even
though I had expressly supposed that God had given no weight to the
matter of which it is composed, this should not prevent all its parts
from tending exactly to its center; how with water and air on its
surface, the disposition of the heavens and heavenly bodies, more
especially of the moon, must cause a flow and ebb, like in all its
circumstances to that observed in our seas, as also a certain current
both of water and air from east to west, such as is likewise observed
between the tropics; how the mountains, seas, fountains, and rivers
might naturally be formed in it, and the metals produced in the mines,
and the plants grow in the fields and in general, how all the bodies
which are commonly denominated mixed or composite might be generated
and, among other things in the discoveries alluded to inasmuch as
besides the stars, I knew nothing except fire which produces light, I
spared no pains to set forth all that pertains to its nature,--the
manner of its production and support, and to explain how heat is
sometimes found without light, and light without heat; to show how it
can induce various colors upon different bodies and other diverse
qualities; how it reduces some to a liquid state and hardens others;
how it can consume almost all bodies, or convert them into ashes and
smoke; and finally, how from these ashes, by the mere intensity of its
action, it forms glass:  for as this transmutation of ashes into glass
appeared to me as wonderful as any other in nature, I took a special
pleasure in describing it. I was not, however, disposed, from these
circumstances, to conclude that this world had been created in the
manner I described; for it is much more likely that God made it at the
first such as it was to be. But this is certain, and an opinion
commonly received among theologians, that the action by which he now
sustains it is the same with that by which he originally created it; so
that even although he had from the beginning given it no other form
than that of chaos, provided only he had established certain laws of
nature, and had lent it his concurrence to enable it to act as it is
wont to do, it may be believed, without discredit to the miracle of
creation, that, in this way alone, things purely material might, in
course of time, have become such as we observe them at present; and
their nature is much more easily conceived when they are beheld coming
in this manner gradually into existence, than when they are only
considered as produced at once in a finished and perfect state. From the description of inanimate bodies and plants, I passed to
animals, and particularly to man. But since I had not as yet
sufficient knowledge to enable me to treat of these in the same manner
as of the rest, that is to say, by deducing effects from their causes,
and by showing from what elements and in what manner nature must
produce them, I remained satisfied with the supposition that God formed
the body of man wholly like to one of ours, as well in the external
shape of the members as in the internal conformation of the organs, of
the same matter with that I had described, and at first placed in it no
rational soul, nor any other principle, in room of the vegetative or
sensitive soul, beyond kindling in the heart one of those fires without
light, such as I had already described, and which I thought was not
different from the heat in hay that has been heaped together before it
is dry, or that which causes fermentation in new wines before they are
run clear of the fruit. For, when I examined the kind of functions
which might, as consequences of this supposition, exist in this body, I
found precisely all those which may exist in us independently of all
power of thinking, and consequently without being in any measure owing
to the soul; in other words, to that part of us which is distinct from
the body, and of which it has been said above that the nature
distinctively consists in thinking, functions in which the animals void
of reason may be said wholly to resemble us; but among which I could
not discover any of those that, as dependent on thought alone, belong
to us as men, while, on the other hand, I did afterwards discover these
as soon as I supposed God to have created a rational soul, and to have
annexed it to this body in a particular manner which I described. But, in order to show how I there handled this matter, I mean here to
give the explication of the motion of the heart and arteries, which, as
the first and most general motion observed in animals, will afford the
means of readily determining what should be thought of all the rest. And that there may be less difficulty in understanding what I am about
to say on this subject, I advise those who are not versed in anatomy,
before they commence the perusal of these observations, to take the
trouble of getting dissected in their presence the heart of some large
animal possessed of lungs (for this is throughout sufficiently like the
human), and to have shown to them its two ventricles or cavities:  in
the first place, that in the right side, with which correspond two very
ample tubes, viz., the hollow vein (vena cava), which is the principal
receptacle of the blood, and the trunk of the tree, as it were, of
which all the other veins in the body are branches; and the arterial
vein (vena arteriosa), inappropriately so denominated, since it is in
truth only an artery, which, taking its rise in the heart, is divided,
after passing out from it, into many branches which presently disperse
themselves all over the lungs; in the second place, the cavity in the
left side, with which correspond in the same manner two canals in size
equal to or larger than the preceding, viz., the venous artery (arteria
venosa), likewise inappropriately thus designated, because it is simply
a vein which comes from the lungs, where it is divided into many
branches, interlaced with those of the arterial vein, and those of the
tube called the windpipe, through which the air we breathe enters; and
the great artery which, issuing from the heart, sends its branches all
over the body. I should wish also that such persons were carefully
shown the eleven pellicles which, like so many small valves, open and
shut the four orifices that are in these two cavities, viz., three at
the entrance of the hollow veins where they are disposed in such a
manner as by no means to prevent the blood which it contains from
flowing into the right ventricle of the heart, and yet exactly to
prevent its flowing out; three at the entrance to the arterial vein,
which, arranged in a manner exactly the opposite of the former, readily
permit the blood contained in this cavity to pass into the lungs, but
hinder that contained in the lungs from returning to this cavity; and,
in like manner, two others at the mouth of the venous artery, which
allow the blood from the lungs to flow into the left cavity of the
heart, but preclude its return; and three at the mouth of the great
artery, which suffer the blood to flow from the heart, but prevent its
reflux. Nor do we need to seek any other reason for the number of
these pellicles beyond this that the orifice of the venous artery being
of an oval shape from the nature of its situation, can be adequately
closed with two, whereas the others being round are more conveniently
closed with three. Besides, I wish such persons to observe that the
grand artery and the arterial vein are of much harder and firmer
texture than the venous artery and the hollow vein; and that the two
last expand before entering the heart, and there form, as it were, two
pouches denominated the auricles of the heart, which are composed of a
substance similar to that of the heart itself; and that there is always
more warmth in the heart than in any other part of the body--and
finally, that this heat is capable of causing any drop of blood that
passes into the cavities rapidly to expand and dilate, just as all
liquors do when allowed to fall drop by drop into a highly heated
vessel. For, after these things, it is not necessary for me to say anything
more with a view to explain the motion of the heart, except that when
its cavities are not full of blood, into these the blood of necessity
flows,--from the hollow vein into the right, and from the venous artery
into the left; because these two vessels are always full of blood, and
their orifices, which are turned towards the heart, cannot then be
closed. But as soon as two drops of blood have thus passed, one into
each of the cavities, these drops which cannot but be very large,
because the orifices through which they pass are wide, and the vessels
from which they come full of blood, are immediately rarefied, and
dilated by the heat they meet with. In this way they cause the whole
heart to expand, and at the same time press home and shut the five
small valves that are at the entrances of the two vessels from which
they flow, and thus prevent any more blood from coming down into the
heart, and becoming more and more rarefied, they push open the six
small valves that are in the orifices of the other two vessels, through
which they pass out, causing in this way all the branches of the
arterial vein and of the grand artery to expand almost simultaneously
with the heart which immediately thereafter begins to contract, as do
also the arteries, because the blood that has entered them has cooled,
and the six small valves close, and the five of the hollow vein and of
the venous artery open anew and allow a passage to other two drops of
blood, which cause the heart and the arteries again to expand as
before. And, because the blood which thus enters into the heart passes
through these two pouches called auricles, it thence happens that their
motion is the contrary of that of the heart, and that when it expands
they contract. But lest those who are ignorant of the force of
mathematical demonstrations and who are not accustomed to distinguish
true reasons from mere verisimilitudes, should venture, without
examination, to deny what has been said, I wish it to be considered
that the motion which I have now explained follows as necessarily from
the very arrangement of the parts, which may be observed in the heart
by the eye alone, and from the heat which may be felt with the fingers,
and from the nature of the blood as learned from experience, as does
the motion of a clock from the power, the situation, and shape of its
counterweights and wheels. But if it be asked how it happens that the blood in the veins, flowing
in this way continually into the heart, is not exhausted, and why the
arteries do not become too full, since all the blood which passes
through the heart flows into them, I need only mention in reply what
has been written by a physician of England, who has the honor of having
broken the ice on this subject, and of having been the first to teach
that there are many small passages at the extremities of the arteries,
through which the blood received by them from the heart passes into the
small branches of the veins, whence it again returns to the heart; so
that its course amounts precisely to a perpetual circulation. Of this
we have abundant proof in the ordinary experience of surgeons, who, by
binding the arm with a tie of moderate straitness above the part where
they open the vein, cause the blood to flow more copiously than it
would have done without any ligature; whereas quite the contrary would
happen were they to bind it below; that is, between the hand and the
opening, or were to make the ligature above the opening very tight. For it is manifest that the tie, moderately straightened, while
adequate to hinder the blood already in the arm from returning towards
the heart by the veins, cannot on that account prevent new blood from
coming forward through the arteries, because these are situated below
the veins, and their coverings, from their greater consistency, are
more difficult to compress; and also that the blood which comes from
the heart tends to pass through them to the hand with greater force
than it does to return from the hand to the heart through the veins. And since the latter current escapes from the arm by the opening made
in one of the veins, there must of necessity be certain passages below
the ligature, that is, towards the extremities of the arm through which
it can come thither from the arteries. This physician likewise
abundantly establishes what he has advanced respecting the motion of
the blood, from the existence of certain pellicles, so disposed in
various places along the course of the veins, in the manner of small
valves, as not to permit the blood to pass from the middle of the body
towards the extremities, but only to return from the extremities to the
heart; and farther, from experience which shows that all the blood
which is in the body may flow out of it in a very short time through a
single artery that has been cut, even although this had been closely
tied in the immediate neighborhood of the heart and cut between the
heart and the ligature, so as to prevent the supposition that the blood
flowing out of it could come from any other quarter than the heart. But there are many other circumstances which evince that what I have
alleged is the true cause of the motion of the blood:  thus, in the
first place, the difference that  is observed between the blood which
flows from the veins, and that from the arteries, can only arise from
this, that being rarefied, and, as it were, distilled by passing
through the heart, it is thinner, and more vivid, and warmer
immediately after leaving the heart, in other words, when in the
arteries, than it was a short time before passing into either, in other
words, when it was in the veins; and if attention be given, it will be
found that this difference is very marked only in the neighborhood of
the heart; and is not so evident in parts more remote from it. In the
next place, the consistency of the coats of which the arterial vein and
the great artery are  composed, sufficiently shows that the blood is
impelled  against them with more force than against the veins. And why
should the left cavity of the heart and the  great artery be wider and
larger than the right cavity and the arterial vein, were it not that
the blood of the  venous artery, having only been in the lungs after it
has passed through the heart, is thinner, and rarefies more readily,
and in a higher degree, than the blood which proceeds immediately from
the hollow vein? And what can physicians conjecture from feeling the
pulse unless they know that according as the blood changes its nature
it can be rarefied by the warmth of the heart, in a higher or lower
degree, and more or less quickly than before? And if it be inquired
how this heat is communicated to the other members, must it not be
admitted that this is effected by means of the blood, which, passing
through the heart, is there heated anew, and thence diffused over all
the body? Whence it happens, that if the blood be withdrawn from any
part, the heat is likewise withdrawn by the same means; and although
the heart were as-hot as glowing iron, it would not be capable of
warming the feet and hands as at present, unless it continually sent
thither new blood. We likewise perceive from this, that the true use
of respiration is to bring sufficient fresh air into the lungs, to
cause the blood which flows into them from the right ventricle of the
heart, where it has been rarefied and, as it were, changed into vapors,
to become thick, and to convert it anew into blood, before it flows
into the left cavity, without which process it would be unfit for the
nourishment of the fire that is there. This receives confirmation from
the circumstance, that it is observed of animals destitute of lungs
that they have also but one cavity in the heart, and that in children
who cannot use them while in the womb, there is a hole through which
the blood flows from the hollow vein into the left cavity of the heart,
and a tube through which it passes from the arterial vein into the
grand artery without passing through the lung. In the next place, how
could digestion be carried on in the stomach unless the heart
communicated heat to it through the arteries, and along with this
certain of the more fluid parts of the blood, which assist in the
dissolution of the food that has been taken in? Is not also the
operation which converts the juice of food into blood easily
comprehended, when it is considered that it is distilled by passing and
repassing through the heart perhaps more than one or two hundred times
in a day? And what more need be adduced to explain nutrition, and the
production of the different humors of the body, beyond saying, that the
force with which the blood, in being rarefied, passes from the heart
towards the extremities of the arteries, causes certain of its parts to
remain in the members at which they arrive, and there occupy the place
of some others expelled by them; and that according to the situation,
shape, or smallness of the pores with which they meet, some rather
than others flow into certain parts, in the same way that some sieves
are observed to act, which, by being variously perforated, serve to
separate different species of grain? And, in the last place, what
above all is here worthy of observation, is the generation of the
animal spirits, which are like a very subtle wind, or rather a very
pure and vivid flame which, continually ascending in great abundance
from the heart to the brain, thence penetrates through the nerves into
the muscles, and gives motion to all the members; so that to account
for other parts of the blood which, as most agitated and penetrating,
are the fittest to compose these spirits, proceeding towards the brain,
it is not necessary to suppose any other cause, than simply, that the
arteries which carry them thither proceed from the heart in the most
direct lines, and that, according to the rules of mechanics which are
the same with those of nature, when many objects tend at once to the
same point where there is not sufficient room for all (as is the case
with the parts of the blood which flow forth from the left cavity of
the heart and tend towards the brain), the weaker and less agitated
parts must necessarily be driven aside from that point by the stronger
which alone in this way reach it I had expounded all these matters with
sufficient minuteness in the treatise which I formerly thought of
publishing. And after these, I had shown what must be the fabric of
the nerves and muscles of the human body to give the animal spirits
contained in it the power to move the members, as when we see heads
shortly after they have been struck off still move and bite the earth,
although no longer animated; what changes must take place in the brain
to produce waking, sleep, and dreams; how light, sounds, odors, tastes,
heat, and all the other qualities of external objects impress it with
different ideas by means of the senses; how hunger, thirst, and the
other internal affections can likewise impress upon it divers ideas;
what must be understood by the common sense (sensus communis) in which
these ideas are received, by the memory which retains them, by the
fantasy which can change them in various ways, and out of them compose
new ideas, and which, by the same means, distributing the animal
spirits through the muscles, can cause the members of such a body to
move in as many different ways, and in a manner as suited, whether to
the objects that are presented to its senses or to its internal
affections, as can take place in our own case apart from the guidance
of the will. Nor will this appear at all strange to those who are
acquainted with the variety of movements performed by the different
automata, or moving machines fabricated by human industry, and that
with help of but few pieces compared with the great multitude of bones,
muscles, nerves, arteries, veins, and other parts that are found in the
body of each animal. Such persons will look upon this body as a
machine made by the hands of God, which is incomparably better
arranged, and adequate to movements more admirable than is any machine
of human invention. And here I specially stayed to show that, were
there such machines exactly resembling organs and outward form an ape
or any other irrational animal, we could have no means of knowing that
they were in any respect of a different nature from these animals; but
if there were machines bearing the image of our bodies, and capable of
imitating our actions as far as it is morally possible, there would
still remain two most certain tests whereby to know that they were not
therefore really men. Of these the first is that they could never use
words or other signs arranged in such a manner as is competent to us in
order to declare our thoughts to others:  for we may easily conceive a
machine to be so constructed that it emits vocables, and even that it
emits some correspondent to the action upon it of external objects
which cause a change in its organs; for example, if touched in a
particular place it may demand what we wish to say to it; if in another
it may cry out that it is hurt, and such like; but not that it should
arrange them variously so as appositely to reply to what is said in its
presence, as men of the lowest grade of intellect can do. The second
test is, that although such machines might execute many things with
equal or perhaps greater perfection than any of us, they would, without
doubt, fail in certain others from which it could be discovered that
they did not act from knowledge, but solely from the disposition of
their organs:  for while reason is an universal instrument that is
alike available on every occasion, these organs, on the contrary, need
a particular arrangement for each particular action; whence it must be
morally impossible that there should exist in any machine a diversity
of organs sufficient to enable it to act in all the occurrences of
life, in the way in which our reason enables us to act. Again, by
means of these two tests we may likewise know the difference between
men and brutes. For it is highly deserving of remark, that there are
no men so dull and stupid, not even idiots, as to be incapable of
joining together different words, and thereby constructing a
declaration by which to make their thoughts understood; and that on the
other hand, there is no other animal, however perfect or happily
circumstanced, which can do the like. Nor does this inability arise
from want of organs:  for we observe that magpies and parrots can utter
words like ourselves, and are yet unable to speak as we do, that is, so
as to show that they understand what they say; in place of which men
born deaf and dumb, and thus not less, but rather more than the brutes,
destitute of the organs which others use in speaking, are in the habit
of spontaneously inventing certain signs by which they discover their
thoughts to those who, being usually in their company, have leisure to
learn their language. And this proves not only that the brutes have
less reason than man, but that they have none at all:  for we see that
very little is required to enable a person to speak; and since a
certain inequality of capacity is observable among animals of the same
species, as well as among men, and since some are more capable of being
instructed than others, it is incredible that the most perfect ape or
parrot of its species, should not in this be equal to the most stupid
infant of its kind or at least to one that was crack-brained, unless
the soul of brutes were of a nature wholly different from ours. And we
ought not to confound speech with the natural movements which indicate
the passions, and can be imitated by machines as well as manifested by
animals; nor must it be thought with certain of the ancients, that the
brutes speak, although we do not understand their language. For if
such were the case, since they are endowed with many organs analogous
to ours, they could as easily communicate their thoughts to us as to
their fellows. It is also very worthy of remark, that, though there
are many animals which manifest more industry than we in certain of
their actions, the same animals are yet observed to show none at all in
many others:  so that the circumstance that they do better than we does
not prove that they are endowed with mind, for it would thence follow
that they possessed greater reason than any of us, and could surpass us
in all things; on the contrary, it rather proves that they are
destitute of reason, and that it is nature which acts in them according
to the disposition of their organs:  thus it is seen, that a clock
composed only of wheels and weights can number the hours and measure
time more exactly than we with all our skin. I had after this described the reasonable soul, and shown that it could
by no means be educed from the power of matter, as the other things of
which I had spoken, but that it must be expressly created; and that it
is not sufficient that it be lodged in the human body exactly like a
pilot in a ship, unless perhaps to move its members, but that it is
necessary for it to be joined and united more closely to the body, in
order to have sensations and appetites similar to ours, and thus
constitute a real man. I here entered, in conclusion, upon the subject
of the soul at considerable length, because it is of the greatest
moment:  for after the error of those who deny the existence of God, an
error which I think I have already sufficiently refuted, there is none
that is more powerful in leading feeble minds astray from the straight
path of virtue than the supposition that the soul of the brutes is of
the same nature with our own; and consequently that after this life we
have nothing to hope for or fear, more than flies and ants; in place of
which, when we know how far they differ we much better comprehend the
reasons which establish that the soul is of a nature wholly independent
of the body, and that consequently it is not liable to die with the
latter and, finally, because no other causes are observed capable of
destroying it, we are naturally led thence to judge that it is immortal. PART VI

Three years have now elapsed since I finished the treatise containing
all these matters; and I was beginning to revise it, with the view to
put it into the hands of a printer, when I learned that persons to whom
I greatly defer, and whose authority over my actions is hardly less
influential than is my own reason over my thoughts, had condemned a
certain doctrine in physics, published a short time previously by
another individual to which I will not say that I adhered, but only
that, previously to their censure I had observed in it nothing which I
could imagine to be prejudicial either to religion or to the state, and
nothing therefore which would have prevented me from giving expression
to it in writing, if reason had persuaded me of its truth; and this led
me to fear lest among my own doctrines likewise some one might be found
in which I had departed from the truth, notwithstanding the great care
I have always taken not to accord belief to new opinions of which I had
not the most certain demonstrations, and not to give expression to
aught that might tend to the hurt of any one. This has been sufficient
to make me alter my purpose of publishing them; for although the
reasons by which I had been induced to take this resolution were very
strong, yet my inclination, which has always been hostile to writing
books, enabled me immediately to discover other considerations
sufficient to excuse me for not undertaking the task. And these
reasons, on one side and the other, are such, that not only is it in
some measure my interest here to state them, but that of the public,
perhaps, to know them. I have never made much account of what has proceeded from my own mind;
and so long as I gathered no other advantage from the method I employ
beyond satisfying myself on some difficulties belonging to the
speculative sciences, or endeavoring to regulate my actions according
to the principles it taught me, I never thought myself bound to publish
anything respecting it. For in what regards manners, every one is so
full of his own wisdom, that there might be found as many reformers as
heads, if any were allowed to take upon themselves the task of mending
them, except those whom God has constituted the supreme rulers of his
people or to whom he has given sufficient grace and zeal to be
prophets; and although my speculations greatly pleased myself, I
believed that others had theirs, which perhaps pleased them still more. But as soon as I had acquired some general notions respecting physics,
and beginning to make trial of them in various particular difficulties,
had observed how far they can carry us, and how much they differ from
the principles that have been employed up to the present time, I
believed that I could not keep them concealed without sinning
grievously against the law by which we are bound to promote, as far as
in us lies, the general good of mankind. For by them I perceived it to
be possible to arrive at knowledge highly useful in life; and in room
of the speculative philosophy usually taught in the schools, to
discover a practical, by means of which, knowing the force and action
of fire, water, air the stars, the heavens, and all the other bodies
that surround us, as distinctly as we know the various crafts of our
artisans, we might also apply them in the same way to all the uses to
which they are adapted, and thus render ourselves the lords and
possessors of nature. And this is a result to be desired, not only in
order to the invention of an infinity of arts, by which we might be
enabled to enjoy without any trouble the fruits of the earth, and all
its comforts, but also and especially for the preservation of health,
which is without doubt, of all the blessings of this life, the first
and fundamental one; for the mind is so intimately dependent upon the
condition and relation of the organs of the body, that if any means can
ever be found to render men wiser and more ingenious than hitherto, I
believe that it is in medicine they must be sought for. It is true
that the science of medicine, as it now exists, contains few things
whose utility is very remarkable:  but without any wish to depreciate
it, I am confident that there is no one, even among those whose
profession it is, who does not admit that all at present known in it is
almost nothing in comparison of what remains to be discovered; and that
we could free ourselves from an infinity of maladies of body as well as
of mind, and perhaps also even from the debility of age, if we had
sufficiently ample knowledge of their causes, and of all the remedies
provided for us by nature. But since I designed to employ my whole
life in the search after so necessary a science, and since I had fallen
in with a path which seems to me such, that if any one follow it he
must inevitably reach the end desired, unless he be hindered either by
the shortness of life or the want of experiments, I judged that there
could be no more effectual provision against these two impediments than
if I were faithfully to communicate to the public all the little I
might myself have found, and incite men of superior genius to strive to
proceed farther, by contributing, each according to his inclination and
ability, to the experiments which it would be necessary to make, and
also by informing the public of all they might discover, so that, by
the last beginning where those before them had left off, and thus
connecting the lives and labours of many, we might collectively proceed
much farther than each by himself could do. I remarked, moreover, with respect to experiments, that they become
always more necessary the more one is advanced in knowledge; for, at
the commencement, it is better to make use only of what is
spontaneously presented to our senses, and of which we cannot remain
ignorant, provided we bestow on it any reflection, however slight, than
to concern ourselves about more uncommon and recondite phenomena:  the
reason of which is, that the more uncommon often only mislead us so
long as the causes of the more ordinary are still unknown; and the
circumstances upon which they depend are almost always so special and
minute as to be highly difficult to detect. But in this I have adopted
the following order:  first, I have essayed to find in general the
principles, or first causes of all that is or can be in the world,
without taking into consideration for this end anything but God himself
who has created it, and without educing them from any other source than
from certain germs of truths naturally existing in our minds In the
second place, I examined what were the first and most ordinary effects
that could be deduced from these causes; and it appears to me that, in
this way, I have found heavens, stars, an earth, and even on the earth
water, air, fire, minerals, and some other things of this kind, which
of all others are the most common and simple, and hence the easiest to
know. Afterwards when I wished to descend to the more particular, so
many diverse objects presented themselves to me, that I believed it to
be impossible for the human mind to distinguish the forms or species of
bodies that are upon the earth, from an infinity of others which might
have been, if it had pleased God to place them there, or consequently
to apply them to our use, unless we rise to causes through their
effects, and avail ourselves of many particular experiments. Thereupon, turning over in my mind I the objects that had ever been
presented to my senses I freely venture to state that I have never
observed any which I could not satisfactorily explain by the principles
had discovered. But it is necessary also to confess that the power of
nature is so ample and vast, and these principles so simple and
general, that I have hardly observed a single particular effect which I
cannot at once recognize as capable of being deduced in man different
modes from the principles, and that my greatest difficulty usually is
to discover in which of these modes the effect is dependent upon them;
for out of this difficulty cannot otherwise extricate myself than by
again seeking certain experiments, which may be such that their result
is not the same, if it is in the one of these modes at we must explain
it, as it would be if it were to be explained in the other. As to what
remains, I am now in a position to discern, as I think, with sufficient
clearness what course must be taken to make the majority those
experiments which may conduce to this end:  but I perceive likewise
that they are such and so numerous, that neither my hands nor my
income, though it were a thousand times larger than it is, would be
sufficient for them all; so that according as henceforward I shall have
the means of making more or fewer experiments, I shall in the same
proportion make greater or less progress in the knowledge of nature. This was what I had hoped to make known by the treatise I had written,
and so clearly to exhibit the advantage that would thence accrue to the
public, as to induce all who have the common good of man at heart, that
is, all who are virtuous in truth, and not merely in appearance, or
according to opinion, as well to communicate to me the experiments they
had already made, as to assist me in those that remain to be made. But since that time other reasons have occurred to me, by which I have
been led to change my opinion, and to think that I ought indeed to go
on committing to writing all the results which I deemed of any moment,
as soon as I should have tested their truth, and to bestow the same
care upon them as I would have done had it been my design to publish
them. This course commended itself to me, as well because I thus
afforded myself more ample inducement to examine them thoroughly, for
doubtless that is always more narrowly scrutinized which we believe
will be read by many, than that which is written merely for our private
use (and frequently what has seemed to me true when I first conceived
it, has appeared false when I have set about committing it to writing),
as because I thus lost no opportunity of advancing the interests of the
public, as far as in me lay, and since thus likewise, if my writings
possess any value, those into whose hands they may fall after my death
may be able to put them to what use they deem proper. But I resolved
by no means to consent to their publication during my lifetime, lest
either the oppositions or the controversies to which they might give
rise, or even the reputation, such as it might be, which they would
acquire for me, should be any occasion of my losing the time that I had
set apart for my own improvement. For though it be true that every one
is bound to promote to the extent of his ability the good of others,
and that to be useful to no one is really to be worthless, yet it is
likewise true that our cares ought to extend beyond the present, and it
is good to omit doing what might perhaps bring some profit to the
living, when we have in view the accomplishment of other ends that will
be of much greater advantage to posterity. And in truth, I am quite
willing it should be known that the little I have hitherto learned is
almost nothing in comparison with that of which I am ignorant, and to
the knowledge of which I do not despair of being able to attain; for it
is much the same with those who gradually discover truth in the
sciences, as with those who when growing rich find less difficulty in
making great acquisitions, than they formerly experienced when poor in
making acquisitions of much smaller amount. Or they may be compared to
the commanders of armies, whose forces usually increase in proportion
to their victories, and who need greater prudence to keep together the
residue of their troops after a defeat than after a victory to take
towns and provinces. For he truly engages in battle who endeavors to
surmount all the difficulties and errors which prevent him from
reaching the knowledge of truth, and he is overcome in fight who admits
a false opinion touching a matter of any generality and importance, and
he requires thereafter much more skill to recover his former position
than to make great advances when once in possession of thoroughly
ascertained principles. As for myself, if I have succeeded in
discovering any truths in the sciences (and I trust that what is
contained in this volume I will show that I have found some), I can
declare that they are but the consequences and results of five or six
principal difficulties which I have surmounted, and my encounters with
which I reckoned as battles in which victory declared for me. I will
not hesitate even to avow my belief that nothing further is wanting to
enable me fully to realize my designs than to gain two or three similar
victories; and that I am not so far advanced in years but that,
according to the ordinary course of nature, I may still have sufficient
leisure for this end. But I conceive myself the more bound to husband
the time that remains the greater my expectation of being able to
employ it aright, and I should doubtless have much to rob me of it,
were I to publish the principles of my physics:  for although they are
almost all so evident that to assent to them no more is needed than
simply to understand them, and although there is not one of them of
which I do not expect to be able to give demonstration, yet, as it is
impossible that they can be in accordance with all the diverse opinions
of others, I foresee that I should frequently be turned aside from my
grand design, on occasion of the opposition which they would be sure to
awaken. It may be said, that these oppositions would be useful both in making
me aware of my errors, and, if my speculations contain anything of
value, in bringing others to a fuller understanding of it; and still
farther, as many can see better than one, in leading others who are now
beginning to avail themselves of my principles, to assist me in turn
with their discoveries. But though I recognize my extreme liability to
error, and scarce ever trust to the first thoughts which occur to me,
yet-the experience I have had of possible objections to my views
prevents me from anticipating any profit from them. For I have already
had frequent proof of the judgments, as well of those I esteemed
friends, as of some others to whom I thought I was an object of
indifference, and even of some whose malignancy and envy would, I knew,
determine them to endeavor to discover what partiality concealed from
the eyes of my friends. But it has rarely happened that anything has
been objected to me which I had myself altogether overlooked, unless it
were something far removed from the subject:  so that I have never met
with a single critic of my opinions who did not appear to me either
less rigorous or less equitable than myself. And further, I have never
observed that any truth before unknown has been brought to light by the
disputations that are practised in the schools; for while each strives
for the victory, each is much more occupied in making the best of mere
verisimilitude, than in weighing the reasons on both sides of the
question; and those who have been long good advocates are not
afterwards on that account the better judges. As for the advantage that others would derive from the communication of
my thoughts, it could not be very great; because I have not yet so far
prosecuted them as that much does not remain to be added before they
can be applied to practice. And I think I may say without vanity, that
if there is any one who can carry them out that length, it must be
myself rather than another:  not that there may not be in the world
many minds incomparably superior to mine, but because one cannot so
well seize a thing and make it one's own, when it has been learned from
another, as when one has himself discovered it. And so true is this of
the present subject that, though I have often explained some of my
opinions to persons of much acuteness, who, whilst I was speaking,
appeared to understand them very distinctly, yet, when they repeated
them, I have observed that they almost always changed them to such an
extent that I could no longer acknowledge them as mine. I am glad, by
the way, to take this opportunity of requesting posterity never to
believe on hearsay that anything has proceeded from me which has not
been published by myself; and I am not at all astonished at the
extravagances attributed to those ancient philosophers whose own
writings we do not possess; whose thoughts, however, I do not on that
account suppose to have been really absurd, seeing they were among the
ablest men of their times, but only that these have been falsely
represented to us. It is observable, accordingly, that scarcely in a
single instance has any one of their disciples surpassed them; and I am
quite sure that the most devoted of the present followers of Aristotle
would think themselves happy if they had as much knowledge of nature as
he possessed, were it even under the condition that they should never
afterwards attain to higher. In this respect they are like the ivy
which never strives to rise above the tree that sustains it, and which
frequently even returns downwards when it has reached the top; for it
seems to me that they also sink, in other words, render themselves less
wise than they would be if they gave up study, who, not contented with
knowing all that is intelligibly explained in their author, desire in
addition to find in him the solution of many difficulties of which he
says not a word, and never perhaps so much as thought. Their fashion
of philosophizing, however, is well suited to persons whose abilities
fall below mediocrity; for the obscurity of the distinctions and
principles of which they make use enables them to speak of all things
with as much confidence as if they really knew them, and to defend all
that they say on any subject against the most subtle and skillful,
without its being possible for any one to convict them of error. In
this they seem to me to be like a blind man, who, in order to fight on
equal terms with a person that sees, should have made him descend to
the bottom of an intensely dark cave:  and I may say that such persons
have an interest in my refraining from publishing the principles of the
philosophy of which I make use; for, since these are of a kind the
simplest and most evident, I should, by publishing them, do much the
same as if I were to throw open the windows, and allow the light of day
to enter the cave into which the combatants had descended. But even
superior men have no reason for any great anxiety to know these
principles, for if what they desire is to be able to speak of all
things, and to acquire a reputation for learning, they will gain their
end more easily by remaining satisfied with the appearance of truth,
which can be found without much difficulty in all sorts of matters,
than by seeking the truth itself which unfolds itself but slowly and
that only in some departments, while it obliges us, when we have to
speak of others, freely to confess our ignorance. If, however, they
prefer the knowledge of some few truths to the vanity of appearing
ignorant of none, as such knowledge is undoubtedly much to be
preferred, and, if they choose to follow a course similar to mine, they
do not require for this that I should say anything more than I have
already said in this discourse. For if they are capable of making
greater advancement than I have made, they will much more be able of
themselves to discover all that I believe myself to have found; since
as I have never examined aught except in order, it is certain that what
yet remains to be discovered is in itself more difficult and recondite,
than that which I have already been enabled to find, and the
gratification would be much less in learning it from me than in
discovering it for themselves. Besides this, the habit which they will
acquire, by seeking first what is easy, and then passing onward slowly
and step by step to the more difficult, will benefit them more than all
my instructions. Thus, in my own case, I am persuaded that if I had
been taught from my youth all the truths of which I have since sought
out demonstrations, and had thus learned them without labour, I should
never, perhaps, have known any beyond these; at least, I should never
have acquired the habit and the facility which I think I possess in
always discovering new truths in proportion as I give myself to the
search. And, in a single word, if there is any work in the world which
cannot be so well finished by another as by him who has commenced it,
it is that at which I labour. It is true, indeed, as regards the experiments which may conduce to
this end, that one man is not equal to the task of making them all; but
yet he can advantageously avail himself, in this work, of no hands
besides his own, unless those of artisans, or parties of the same kind,
whom he could pay, and whom the hope of gain (a means of great
efficacy) might stimulate to accuracy in the performance of what was
prescribed to them. For as to those who, through curiosity or a desire
of learning, of their own accord, perhaps, offer him their services,
besides that in general their promises exceed their performance, and
that they sketch out fine designs of which not one is ever realized,
they will, without doubt, expect to be compensated for their trouble by
the explication of some difficulties, or, at least, by compliments and
useless speeches, in which he cannot spend any portion of his time
without loss to himself. And as for the experiments that others have
already made, even although these parties should be willing of
themselves to communicate them to him (which is what those who esteem
them secrets will never do), the experiments are, for the most part,
accompanied with so many circumstances and superfluous elements, as to
make it exceedingly difficult to disentangle the truth from its
adjuncts--besides, he will find almost all of them so ill described, or
even so false (because those who made them have wished to see in them
only such facts as they deemed conformable to their principles), that,
if in the entire number there should be some of a nature suited to his
purpose, still their value could not compensate for the time what would
be necessary to make the selection. So that if there existed any one
whom we assuredly knew to be capable of making discoveries of the
highest kind, and of the greatest possible utility to the public; and
if all other men were therefore eager by all means to assist him in
successfully prosecuting his designs, I do not see that they could do
aught else for him beyond contributing to defray the expenses of the
experiments that might be necessary; and for the rest, prevent his
being deprived of his leisure by the unseasonable interruptions of any
one. But besides that I neither have so high an opinion of myself as
to be willing to make promise of anything extraordinary, nor feed on
imaginations so vain as to fancy that the public must be much
interested in my designs; I do not, on the other hand, own a soul so
mean as to be capable of accepting from any one a favor of which it
could be supposed that I was unworthy. These considerations taken together were the reason why, for the last
three years, I have been unwilling to publish the treatise I had on
hand, and why I even resolved to give publicity during my life to no
other that was so general, or by which the principles of my physics
might be understood. But since then, two other reasons have come into
operation that have determined me here to subjoin some particular
specimens, and give the public some account of my doings and designs. Of these considerations, the first is, that if I failed to do so, many
who were cognizant of my previous intention to publish some writings,
might have imagined that the reasons which induced me to refrain from
so doing, were less to my credit than they really are; for although I
am not immoderately desirous of glory, or even, if I may venture so to
say, although I am averse from it in so far as I deem it hostile to
repose which I hold in greater account than aught else, yet, at the
same time, I have never sought to conceal my actions as if they were
crimes, nor made use of many precautions that I might remain unknown;
and this partly because I should have thought such a course of conduct
a wrong against myself, and partly because it would have occasioned me
some sort of uneasiness which would again have been contrary to the
perfect mental tranquillity which I court. And forasmuch as, while
thus indifferent to the thought alike of fame or of forgetfulness, I
have yet been unable to prevent myself from acquiring some sort of
reputation, I have thought it incumbent on me to do my best to save
myself at least from being ill-spoken of. The other reason that has
determined me to commit to writing these specimens of philosophy is,
that I am becoming daily more and more alive to the delay which my
design of self-instruction suffers, for want of the infinity of
experiments I require, and which it is impossible for me to make
without the assistance of others:  and, without flattering myself so
much as to expect the public to take a large share in my interests, I
am yet unwilling to be found so far wanting in the duty I owe to
myself, as to give occasion to those who shall survive me to make it
matter of reproach against me some day, that I might have left them
many things in a much more perfect state than I have done, had I not
too much neglected to make them aware of the ways in which they could
have promoted the accomplishment of my designs. And I thought that it was easy for me to select some matters which
should neither be obnoxious to much controversy, nor should compel me
to expound more of my principles than I desired, and which should yet
be sufficient clearly to exhibit what I can or cannot accomplish in the
sciences. Whether or not I have succeeded in this it is not for me to
say; and I do not wish to forestall the judgments of others by speaking
myself of my writings; but it will gratify me if they be examined, and,
to afford the greater inducement to this I request all who may have any
objections to make to them, to take the trouble of forwarding these to
my publisher, who will give me notice of them, that I may endeavor to
subjoin at the same time my reply; and in this way readers seeing both
at once will more easily determine where the truth lies; for I do not
engage in any case to make prolix replies, but only with perfect
frankness to avow my errors if I am convinced of them, or if I cannot
perceive them, simply to state what I think is required for defense of
the matters I have written, adding thereto no explication of any new
matte that it may not be necessary to pass without end from one thing
to another. If some of the matters of which I have spoken in the beginning of the
"Dioptrics" and "Meteorics" should offend at first sight, because I
call them hypotheses and seem indifferent about giving proof of them, I
request a patient and attentive reading of the whole, from which I hope
those hesitating will derive satisfaction; for it appears to me that
the reasonings are so mutually connected in these treatises, that, as
the last are demonstrated by the first which are their causes, the
first are in their turn demonstrated by the last which are their
effects. Nor must it be imagined that I here commit the fallacy which
the logicians call a circle; for since experience renders the majority
of these effects most certain, the causes from which I deduce them do
not serve so much to establish their reality as to explain their
existence; but on the contrary, the reality of the causes is
established by the reality of the effects. Nor have I called them
hypotheses with any other end in view except that it may be known that
I think I am able to deduce them from those first truths which I have
already expounded; and yet that I have expressly determined not to do
so, to prevent a certain class of minds from thence taking occasion to
build some extravagant philosophy upon what they may take to be my
principles, and my being blamed for it. I refer to those who imagine
that they can master in a day all that another has taken twenty years
to think out, as soon as he has spoken two or three words to them on
the subject; or who are the more liable to error and the less capable
of perceiving truth in very proportion as they are more subtle and
lively. As to the opinions which are truly and wholly mine, I offer no
apology for them as new,--persuaded as I am that if their reasons be
well considered they will be found to be so simple and so conformed, to
common sense as to appear less extraordinary and less paradoxical than
any others which can be held on the same subjects; nor do I even boast
of being the earliest discoverer of any of them, but only of having
adopted them, neither because they had nor because they had not been
held by others, but solely because reason has convinced me of their
truth. Though artisans may not be able at once to execute the invention which
is explained in the "Dioptrics," I do not think that any one on that
account is entitled to condemn it; for since address and practice are
required in order so to make and adjust the machines described by me as
not to overlook the smallest particular, I should not be less
astonished if they succeeded on the first attempt than if a person were
in one day to become an accomplished performer on the guitar, by merely
having excellent sheets of music set up before him. And if I write in
French, which is the language of my country, in preference to Latin,
which is that of my preceptors, it is because I expect that those who
make use of their unprejudiced natural reason will be better judges of
my opinions than those who give heed to the writings of the ancients
only; and as for those who unite good sense with habits of study, whom
alone I desire for judges, they will not, I feel assured, be so partial
to Latin as to refuse to listen to my reasonings merely because I
expound them in the vulgar tongue. In conclusion, I am unwilling here to say anything very specific of the
progress which I expect to make for the future in the sciences, or to
bind myself to the public by any promise which I am not certain of
being able to fulfill; but this only will I say, that I have resolved
to devote what time I may still have to live to no other occupation
than that of endeavoring to acquire some knowledge of Nature, which
shall be of such a kind as to enable us therefrom to deduce rules in
medicine of greater certainty than those at present in use; and that my
inclination is so much opposed to all other pursuits, especially to
such as cannot be useful to some without being hurtful to others, that
if, by any circumstances, I had been constrained to engage in such, I
do not believe that I should have been able to succeed. Of this I here
make a public declaration, though well aware that it cannot serve to
procure for me any consideration in the world, which, however, I do not
in the least affect; and I shall always hold myself more obliged to
those through whose favor I am permitted to enjoy my retirement without
interruption than to any who might offer me the highest earthly
preferments.﻿Sir,--The version of my principles which you have been at pains to
make, is so elegant and finished as to lead me to expect that the
work will be more generally read in French than in Latin, and better
understood. The only apprehension I entertain is lest the title
should deter some who have not been brought up to letters, or with
whom philosophy is in bad repute, because the kind they were taught
has proved unsatisfactory; and this makes me think that it will be
useful to add a preface to it for the purpose of showing what the
MATTER of the work is, what END I had in view in writing it, and
what UTILITY may be derived from it. But although it might be my
part to write a preface of this nature, seeing I ought to know those
particulars better than any other person, I cannot nevertheless
prevail upon myself to do anything more than merely to give a
summary of the chief points that fall, as I think, to be discussed
in it: and I leave it to your discretion to present to the public
such part of them as you shall judge proper. I should have desired, in the first place, to explain in it what
philosophy is, by commencing with the most common matters, as, for
example, that the word PHILOSOPHY signifies the study of wisdom, and
that by wisdom is to be understood not merely prudence in the
management of affairs, but a perfect knowledge of all that man can
know, as well for the conduct of his life as for the preservation of
his health and the discovery of all the arts, and that knowledge to
subserve these ends must necessarily be deduced from first causes;
so that in order to study the acquisition of it (which is properly
called philosophizing), we must commence with the investigation of
those first causes which are called PRINCIPLES. Now these principles
must possess TWO CONDITIONS: in the first place, they must be so
clear and evident that the human mind, when it attentively considers
them, cannot doubt of their truth; in the second place, the
knowledge of other things must be so dependent on them as that
though the principles themselves may indeed be known apart from what
depends on them, the latter cannot nevertheless be known apart from
the former. It will accordingly be necessary thereafter to endeavour
so to deduce from those principles the knowledge of the things that
depend on them, as that there may be nothing in the whole series of
deductions which is not perfectly manifest. God is in truth the only
being who is absolutely wise, that is, who possesses a perfect
knowledge of all things; but we may say that men are more or less
wise as their knowledge of the most important truths is greater or
less. And I am confident that there is nothing, in what I have now
said, in which all the learned do not concur. I should, in the next place, have proposed to consider the utility
of philosophy, and at the same time have shown that, since it
embraces all that the human mind can know, we ought to believe that
it is by it we are distinguished from savages and barbarians, and
that the civilisation and culture of a nation is regulated by the
degree in which true philosophy nourishes in it, and, accordingly,
that to contain true philosophers is the highest privilege a state
can enjoy. Besides this, I should have shown that, as regards
individuals, it is not only useful for each man to have intercourse
with those who apply themselves to this study, but that it is
incomparably better he should himself direct his attention to it;
just as it is doubtless to be preferred that a man should make use
of his own eyes to direct his steps, and enjoy by means of the same
the beauties of colour and light, than that he should blindly follow
the guidance of another; though the latter course is certainly
better than to have the eyes closed with no guide except one's self. But to live without philosophizing is in truth the same as keeping
the eyes closed without attempting to open them; and the pleasure of
seeing all that sight discloses is not to be compared with the
satisfaction afforded by the discoveries of philosophy. And,
finally, this study is more imperatively requisite for the
regulation of our manners, and for conducting us through life, than
is the use of our eyes for directing our steps. The brutes, which
have only their bodies to conserve, are continually occupied in
seeking sources of nourishment; but men, of whom the chief part is
the mind, ought to make the search after wisdom their principal
care, for wisdom is the true nourishment of the mind; and I feel
assured, moreover, that there are very many who would not fail in
the search, if they would but hope for success in it, and knew the
degree of their capabilities for it. There is no mind, how ignoble
soever it be, which remains so firmly bound up in the objects of the
senses, as not sometime or other to turn itself away from them in
the aspiration after some higher good, although not knowing
frequently wherein that good consists. The greatest favourites of
fortune--those who have health, honours, and riches in abundance--
are not more exempt from aspirations of this nature than others;
nay, I am persuaded that these are the persons who sigh the most
deeply after another good greater and more perfect still than any
they already possess. But the supreme good, considered by natural
reason without the light of faith, is nothing more than the
knowledge of truth through its first causes, in other words, the
wisdom of which philosophy is the study. And, as all these
particulars are indisputably true, all that is required to gain
assent to their truth is that they be well stated. But as one is restrained from assenting to these doctrines by
experience, which shows that they who make pretensions to philosophy
are often less wise and reasonable than others who never applied
themselves to the study, I should have here shortly explained
wherein consists all the science we now possess, and what are the
degrees of wisdom at which we have arrived. The first degree
contains only notions so clear of themselves that they can be
acquired without meditation; the second comprehends all that the
experience of the senses dictates; the third, that which the
conversation of other men teaches us; to which may be added as the
fourth, the reading, not of all books, but especially of such as
have been written by persons capable of conveying proper
instruction, for it is a species of conversation we hold with their
authors. And it seems to me that all the wisdom we in ordinary
possess is acquired only in these four ways; for I do not class
divine revelation among them, because it does not conduct us by
degrees, but elevates us at once to an infallible faith. There have been, indeed, in all ages great minds who endeavoured to
find a fifth road to wisdom, incomparably more sure and elevated
than the other four. The path they essayed was the search of first
causes and true principles, from which might be deduced the reasons
of all that can be known by man; and it is to them the appellation
of philosophers has been more especially accorded. I am not aware
that there is any one of them up to the present who has succeeded in
this enterprise. The first and chief whose writings we possess are
Plato and Aristotle, between whom there was no difference, except
that the former, following in the footsteps of his master, Socrates,
ingenuously confessed that he had never yet been able to find
anything certain, and that he was contented to write what seemed to
him probable, imagining, for this end, certain principles by which
he endeavoured to account for the other things. Aristotle, on the
other hand, characterised by less candour, although for twenty years
the disciple of Plato, and with no principles beyond those of his
master, completely reversed his mode of putting them, and proposed
as true and certain what it is probable he himself never esteemed as
such. But these two men had acquired much judgment and wisdom by the
four preceding means, qualities which raised their authority very
high, so much so that those who succeeded them were willing rather
to acquiesce in their opinions, than to seek better for themselves. The chief question among their disciples, however, was as to whether
we ought to doubt of all things or hold some as certain,--a dispute
which led them on both sides into extravagant errors; for a part of
those who were for doubt, extended it even to the actions of life,
to the neglect of the most ordinary rules required for its conduct;
those, on the other hand, who maintained the doctrine of certainty,
supposing that it must depend upon the senses, trusted entirely to
them. To such an extent was this carried by Epicurus, that it is
said he ventured to affirm, contrary to all the reasonings of the
astronomers, that the sun is no larger than it appears. It is a fault we may remark in most disputes, that, as truth is the
mean between the two opinions that are upheld, each disputant
departs from it in proportion to the degree in which he possesses
the spirit of contradiction. But the error of those who leant too
much to the side of doubt, was not followed for any length of time,
and that of the opposite party has been to some extent corrected by
the doctrine that the senses are deceitful in many instances. Nevertheless, I do not know that this error was wholly removed by
showing that certitude is not in the senses, but in the
understanding alone when it has clear perceptions; and that while we
only possess the knowledge which is acquired in the first four
grades of wisdom, we ought not to doubt of the things that appear to
be true in what regards the conduct of life, nor esteem them as so
certain that we cannot change our opinions regarding them, even
though constrained by the evidence of reason. From ignorance of this truth, or, if there was any one to whom it
was known, from neglect of it, the majority of those who in these
later ages aspired to be philosophers, blindly followed Aristotle,
so that they frequently corrupted the sense of his writings, and
attributed to him various opinions which he would not recognise as
his own were he now to return to the world; and those who did not
follow him, among whom are to be found many of the greatest minds,
did yet not escape being imbued with his opinions in their youth, as
these form the staple of instruction in the schools; and thus their
minds were so preoccupied that they could not rise to the knowledge
of true principles. And though I hold all the philosophers in
esteem, and am unwilling to incur odium by my censure, I can adduce
a proof of my assertion, which I do not think any of them will
gainsay, which is, that they all laid down as a principle what they
did not perfectly know. For example, I know none of them who did not
suppose that there was gravity in terrestrial bodies; but although
experience shows us very clearly that bodies we call heavy descend
towards the center of the earth, we do not, therefore, know the
nature of gravity, that is, the cause or principle in virtue of
which bodies descend, and we must derive our knowledge of it from
some other source. The same may be said of a vacuum and atoms, of
heat and cold, of dryness and humidity, and of salt, sulphur, and
mercury, and the other things of this sort which some have adopted
as their principles. But no conclusion deduced from a principle
which is not clear can be evident, even although the deduction be
formally valid; and hence it follows that no reasonings based on
such principles could lead them to the certain knowledge of any one
thing, nor consequently advance them one step in the search after
wisdom. And if they did discover any truth, this was due to one or
other of the four means above mentioned. Notwithstanding this, I am
in no degree desirous to lessen the honour which each of them can
justly claim; I am only constrained to say, for the consolation of
those who have not given their attention to study, that just as in
travelling, when we turn our back upon the place to which we were
going, we recede the farther from it in proportion as we proceed in
the new direction for a greater length of time and with greater
speed, so that, though we may be afterwards brought back to the
right way, we cannot nevertheless arrive at the destined place as
soon as if we had not moved backwards at all; so in philosophy, when
we make use of false principles, we depart the farther from the
knowledge of truth and wisdom exactly in proportion to the care with
which we cultivate them, and apply ourselves to the deduction of
diverse consequences from them, thinking that we are philosophizing
well, while we are only departing the farther from the truth; from
which it must be inferred that they who have learned the least of
all that has been hitherto distinguished by the name of philosophy
are the most fitted for the apprehension of truth. After making those matters clear, I should, in the next place, have
desired to set forth the grounds for holding that the true
principles by which we may reach that highest degree of wisdom
wherein consists the sovereign good of human life, are those I have
proposed in this work; and two considerations alone are sufficient
to establish this--the first of which is, that these principles are
very clear, and the second, that we can deduce all other truths from
them; for it is only these two conditions that are required in true
principles. But I easily prove that they are very clear; firstly, by
a reference to the manner in which I found them, namely, by
rejecting all propositions that were in the least doubtful, for it
is certain that such as could not be rejected by this test when they
were attentively considered, are the most evident and clear which
the human mind can know. Thus by considering that he who strives to
doubt of all is unable nevertheless to doubt that he is while he
doubts, and that what reasons thus, in not being able to doubt of
itself and doubting nevertheless of everything else, is not that
which we call our body, but what we name our mind or thought, I have
taken the existence of this thought for the first principle, from
which I very clearly deduced the following truths, namely, that
there is a God who is the author of all that is in the world, and
who, being the source of all truth, cannot have created our
understanding of such a nature as to be deceived in the judgments it
forms of the things of which it possesses a very clear and distinct
perception. Those are all the principles of which I avail myself
touching immaterial or metaphysical objects, from which I most
clearly deduce these other principles of physical or corporeal
things, namely, that there are bodies extended in length, breadth,
and depth, which are of diverse figures and are moved in a variety
of ways. Such are in sum the principles from which I deduce all
other truths. The second circumstance that proves the clearness of
these principles is, that they have been known in all ages, and even
received as true and indubitable by all men, with the exception only
of the existence of God, which has been doubted by some, because
they attributed too much to the perceptions of the senses, and God
can neither be seen nor touched. But, though all the truths which I class among my principles were
known at all times, and by all men, nevertheless, there has been no
one up to the present, who, so far as I know, has adopted them as
principles of philosophy: in other words, as such that we can deduce
from them the knowledge of whatever else is in the world. It
accordingly now remains for me to prove that they are such; and it
appears to me that I cannot better establish this than by the test
of experience: in other words, by inviting readers to peruse the
following work. For, though I have not treated in it of all matters-
-that being impossible--I think I have so explained all of which I
had occasion to treat, that they who read it attentively will have
ground for the persuasion that it is unnecessary to seek for any
other principles than those I have given, in order to arrive at the
most exalted knowledge of which the mind of man is capable;
especially if, after the perusal of my writings, they take the
trouble to consider how many diverse questions are therein discussed
and explained, and, referring to the writings of others, they see
how little probability there is in the reasons that are adduced in
explanation of the same questions by principles different from mine. And that they may the more easily undertake this, I might have said
that those imbued with my doctrines have much less difficulty in
comprehending the writings of others, and estimating their true
value, than those who have not been so imbued; and this is precisely
the opposite of what I before said of such as commenced with the
ancient philosophy, namely, that the more they have studied it the
less fit are they for rightly apprehending the truth. I should also have added a word of advice regarding the manner of
reading this work, which is, that I should wish the reader at first
to go over the whole of it, as he would a romance, without greatly
straining his attention, or tarrying at the difficulties he may
perhaps meet with in it, with the view simply of knowing in general
the matters of which I treat; and that afterwards, if they seem to
him to merit a more careful examination, and he feel a desire to
know their causes, he may read it a second time, in order to observe
the connection of my reasonings; but that he must not then give it
up in despair, although he may not everywhere sufficiently discover
the connection of the proof, or understand all the reasonings--it
being only necessary to mark with a pen the places where the
difficulties occur, and continue to read without interruption to the
end; then, if he does not grudge to take up the book a third time, I
am confident he will find in a fresh perusal the solution of most of
the difficulties he will have marked before; and that, if any still
remain, their solution will in the end be found in another reading. I have observed, on examining the natural constitutions of different
minds, that there are hardly any so dull or slow of understanding as
to be incapable of apprehending good opinions, or even of acquiring
all the highest sciences, if they be but conducted along the right
road. And this can also be proved by reason; for, as the principles
are clear, and as nothing ought to be deduced from them, unless most
manifest inferences, no one is so devoid of intelligence as to be
unable to comprehend the conclusions that flow from them. But,
besides the entanglement of prejudices, from which no one is
entirely exempt, although it is they who have been the most ardent
students of the false sciences that receive the greatest detriment
from them, it happens very generally that people of ordinary
capacity neglect to study from a conviction that they want ability,
and that others, who are more ardent, press on too rapidly: whence
it comes to pass that they frequently admit principles far from
evident, and draw doubtful inferences from them. For this reason, I
should wish to assure those who are too distrustful of their own
ability that there is nothing in my writings which they may not
entirely understand, if they only take the trouble to examine them;
and I should wish, at the same time, to warn those of an opposite
tendency that even the most superior minds will have need of much
time and attention to remark all I designed to embrace therein. After this, that I might lead men to understand the real design I
had in publishing them, I should have wished here to explain the
order which it seems to me one ought to follow with the view of
instructing himself. In the first place, a man who has merely the
vulgar and imperfect knowledge which can be acquired by the four
means above explained, ought, before all else, to endeavour to form
for himself a code of morals, sufficient to regulate the actions of
his life, as well for the reason that this does not admit of delay
as because it ought to be our first care to live well. In the next
place, he ought to study Logic, not that of the schools, for it is
only, properly speaking, a dialectic which teaches the mode of
expounding to others what we already know, or even of speaking much,
without judgment, of what we do not know, by which means it corrupts
rather than increases good sense--but the logic which teaches the
right conduct of the reason with the view of discovering the truths
of which we are ignorant; and, because it greatly depends on usage,
it is desirable he should exercise himself for a length of time in
practising its rules on easy and simple questions, as those of the
mathematics. Then, when he has acquired some skill in discovering
the truth in these questions, he should commence to apply himself in
earnest to true philosophy, of which the first part is Metaphysics,
containing the principles of knowledge, among which is the
explication of the principal attributes of God, of the immateriality
of the soul, and of all the clear and simple notions that are in us;
the second is Physics, in which, after finding the true principles
of material things, we examine, in general, how the whole universe
has been framed; in the next place, we consider, in particular, the
nature of the earth, and of all the bodies that are most generally
found upon it, as air, water, fire, the loadstone and other
minerals. In the next place it is necessary also to examine singly
the nature of plants, of animals, and above all of man, in order
that we may thereafter be able to discover the other sciences that
are useful to us. Thus, all Philosophy is like a tree, of which
Metaphysics is the root, Physics the trunk, and all the other
sciences the branches that grow out of this trunk, which are reduced
to three principal, namely, Medicine, Mechanics, and Ethics. By the
science of Morals, I understand the highest and most perfect which,
presupposing an entire knowledge of the other sciences, is the last
degree of wisdom. But as it is not from the roots or the trunks of trees that we
gather the fruit, but only from the extremities of their branches,
so the principal utility of philosophy depends on the separate uses
of its parts, which we can only learn last of all. But, though I am
ignorant of almost all these, the zeal I have always felt in
endeavouring to be of service to the public, was the reason why I
published, some ten or twelve years ago, certain Essays on the
doctrines I thought I had acquired. The first part of these Essays
was a "Discourse on the Method of rightly conducting the Reason, and
seeking Truth in the Sciences," in which I gave a summary of the
principal rules of logic, and also of an imperfect ethic, which a
person may follow provisionally so long as he does not know any
better. The other parts were three treatises: the first of
Dioptrics, the second of Meteors, and the third of Geometry. In the
Dioptrics, I designed to show that we might proceed far enough in
philosophy as to arrive, by its means, at the knowledge of the arts
that are useful to life, because the invention of the telescope, of
which I there gave an explanation, is one of the most difficult that
has ever been made. In the treatise of Meteors, I desired to exhibit
the difference that subsists between the philosophy I cultivate and
that taught in the schools, in which the same matters are usually
discussed. In fine, in the Geometry, I professed to demonstrate that
I had discovered many things that were before unknown, and thus
afford ground for believing that we may still discover many others,
with the view of thus stimulating all to the investigation of truth. Since that period, anticipating the difficulty which many would
experience in apprehending the foundations of the Metaphysics, I
endeavoured to explain the chief points of them in a book of
Meditations, which is not in itself large, but the size of which has
been increased, and the matter greatly illustrated, by the
Objections which several very learned persons sent to me on occasion
of it, and by the Replies which I made to them. At length, after it
appeared to me that those preceding treatises had sufficiently
prepared the minds of my readers for the Principles of Philosophy, I
also published it; and I have divided this work into four parts, the
first of which contains the principles of human knowledge, and which
may be called the First Philosophy, or Metaphysics. That this part,
accordingly, may be properly understood, it will be necessary to
read beforehand the book of Meditations I wrote on the same subject. The other three parts contain all that is most general in Physics,
namely, the explication of the first laws or principles of nature,
and the way in which the heavens, the fixed stars, the planets,
comets, and generally the whole universe, were composed; in the next
place, the explication, in particular, of the nature of this earth,
the air, water, fire, the magnet, which are the bodies we most
commonly find everywhere around it, and of all the qualities we
observe in these bodies, as light, heat, gravity, and the like. In
this way, it seems to me, I have commenced the orderly explanation
of the whole of philosophy, without omitting any of the matters that
ought to precede the last which I discussed. But to bring this
undertaking to its conclusion, I ought hereafter to explain, in the
same manner, the nature of the other more particular bodies that are
on the earth, namely, minerals, plants, animals, and especially man;
finally, to treat thereafter with accuracy of Medicine, Ethics, and
Mechanics. I should require to do this in order to give to the world
a complete body of philosophy; and I do not yet feel myself so old,-
-I do not so much distrust my strength, nor do I find myself so far
removed from the knowledge of what remains, as that I should not
dare to undertake to complete this design, provided I were in a
position to make all the experiments which I should require for the
basis and verification of my reasonings. But seeing that would
demand a great expenditure, to which the resources of a private
individual like myself would not be adequate, unless aided by the
public, and as I have no ground to expect this aid, I believe that I
ought for the future to content myself with studying for my own
instruction, and posterity will excuse me if I fail hereafter to
labour for them. Meanwhile, that it may be seen wherein I think I have already
promoted the general good, I will here mention the fruits that may
be gathered from my Principles. The first is the satisfaction which
the mind will experience on finding in the work many truths before
unknown; for although frequently truth does not so greatly affect
our imagination as falsity and fiction, because it seems less
wonderful and is more simple, yet the gratification it affords is
always more durable and solid. The second fruit is, that in studying
these principles we will become accustomed by degrees to judge
better of all the things we come in contact with, and thus be made
wiser, in which respect the effect will be quite the opposite of the
common philosophy, for we may easily remark in those we call pedants
that it renders them less capable of rightly exercising their reason
than they would have been if they had never known it. The third is,
that the truths which they contain, being highly clear and certain,
will take away all ground of dispute, and thus dispose men's minds
to gentleness and concord; whereas the contrary is the effect of the
controversies of the schools, which, as they insensibly render those
who are exercised in them more wrangling and opinionative, are
perhaps the prime cause of the heresies and dissensions that now
harass the world. The last and chief fruit of these Principles is,
that one will be able, by cultivating them, to discover many truths
I myself have not unfolded, and thus passing by degrees from one to
another, to acquire in course of time a perfect knowledge of the
whole of philosophy, and to rise to the highest degree of wisdom. For just as all the arts, though in their beginnings they are rude
and imperfect, are yet gradually perfected by practice, from their
containing at first something true, and whose effect experience
evinces; so in philosophy, when we have true principles, we cannot
fail by following them to meet sometimes with other truths; and we
could not better prove the falsity of those of Aristotle, than by
saying that men made no progress in knowledge by their means during
the many ages they prosecuted them. I well know that there are some men so precipitate and accustomed to
use so little circumspection in what they do, that, even with the
most solid foundations, they could not rear a firm superstructure;
and as it is usually those who are the readiest to make books, they
would in a short time mar all that I have done, and introduce
uncertainty and doubt into my manner of philosophizing, from which I
have carefully endeavoured to banish them, if people were to receive
their writings as mine, or as representing my opinions. I had, not
long ago, some experience of this in one of those who were believed
desirous of following me the most closely, [Footnote: Regius; see La
Vie de M. Descartes, reduite en abrege (Baillet). Liv. vii., chap. vii.--T.] and one too of whom I had somewhere said that I had such
confidence in his genius as to believe that he adhered to no
opinions which I should not be ready to avow as mine; for he last
year published a book entitled "Fundamental Physics," in which,
although he seems to have written nothing on the subject of Physics
and Medicine which he did not take from my writings, as well from
those I have published as from another still imperfect on the nature
of animals, which fell into his hands; nevertheless, because he has
copied them badly, and changed the order, and denied certain
metaphysical truths upon which all Physics ought to be based, I am
obliged wholly to disavow his work, and here to request readers not
to attribute to me any opinion unless they find it expressly stated
in my own writings, and to receive no opinion as true, whether in my
writings or elsewhere, unless they see that it is very clearly
deduced from true principles. I well know, likewise, that many ages
may elapse ere all the truths deducible from these principles are
evolved out of them, as well because the greater number of such as
remain to be discovered depend on certain particular experiments
that never occur by chance, but which require to be investigated
with care and expense by men of the highest intelligence, as because
it will hardly happen that the same persons who have the sagacity to
make a right use of them, will possess also the means of making
them, and also because the majority of the best minds have formed so
low an estimate of philosophy in general, from the imperfections
they have remarked in the kind in vogue up to the present time, that
they cannot apply themselves to the search after truth. But, in conclusion, if the difference discernible between the
principles in question and those of every other system, and the
great array of truths deducible from them, lead them to discern the
importance of continuing the search after these truths, and to
observe the degree of wisdom, the perfection and felicity of life,
to which they are fitted to conduct us, I venture to believe that
there will not be found one who is not ready to labour hard in so
profitable a study, or at least to favour and aid with all his might
those who shall devote themselves to it with success. The height of my wishes is, that posterity may sometime behold the
happy issue of it, etc. TO THE MOST SERENE PRINCESS,

ELIZABETH, ELDEST DAUGHTER OF FREDERICK, KING OF BOHEMIA, COUNT
PALATINE, AND ELECTOR OF THE SACRED ROMAN EMPIRE. MADAM,--The greatest advantage I have derived from the writings
which I have already published, has arisen from my having, through
means of them, become known to your Highness, and thus been
privileged to hold occasional converse with one in whom so many rare
and estimable qualities are united, as to lead me to believe I
should do service to the public by proposing them as an example to
posterity. It would ill become me to flatter, or to give expression
to anything of which I had no certain knowledge, especially in the
first pages of a work in which I aim at laying down the principles
of truth. And the generous modesty that is conspicuous in all your
actions, assures me that the frank and simple judgment of a man who
only writes what he believes will be more agreeable to you than the
ornate laudations of those who have studied the art of compliment. For this reason, I will give insertion to nothing in this letter for
which I have not the certainty both of experience and reason; and in
the exordium, as in the rest of the work, I will write only as
becomes a philosopher. There is a vast difference between real and
apparent virtues; and there is also a great discrepancy between
those real virtues that proceed from an accurate knowledge of the
truth, and such as are accompanied with ignorance or error. The
virtues I call apparent are only, properly speaking, vices, which,
as they are less frequent than the vices that are opposed to them,
and are farther removed from them than the intermediate virtues, are
usually held in higher esteem than those virtues. Thus, because
those who fear dangers too much are more numerous than they who fear
them too little, temerity is frequently opposed to the vice of
timidity, and taken for a virtue, and is commonly more highly
esteemed than true fortitude. Thus, also, the prodigal are in
ordinary more praised than the liberal; and none more easily acquire
a great reputation for piety than the superstitious and
hypocritical. With regard to true virtues, these do not all proceed
from true knowledge, for there are some that likewise spring from
defect or error; thus, simplicity is frequently the source of
goodness, fear of devotion, and despair of courage. The virtues that
are thus accompanied with some imperfections differ from each other,
and have received diverse appellations. But those pure and perfect
virtues that arise from the knowledge of good alone are all of the
same nature, and may be comprised under the single term wisdom. For,
whoever owns the firm and constant resolution of always using his
reason as well as lies in his power, and in all his actions of doing
what he judges to be best, is truly wise, as far as his nature
permits; and by this alone he is just, courageous, temperate, and
possesses all the other virtues, but so well balanced as that none
of them appears more prominent than another: and for this reason,
although they are much more perfect than the virtues that blaze
forth through the mixture of some defect, yet, because the crowd
thus observes them less, they are not usually extolled so highly. Besides, of the two things that are requisite for the wisdom thus
described, namely, the perception of the understanding and the
disposition of the will, it is only that which lies in the will
which all men can possess equally, inasmuch as the understanding of
some is inferior to that of others. But although those who have only
an inferior understanding may be as perfectly wise as their nature
permits, and may render themselves highly acceptable to God by their
virtue, provided they preserve always a firm and constant resolution
to do all that they shall judge to be right, and to omit nothing
that may lead them to the knowledge of the duties of which they are
ignorant; nevertheless, those who preserve a constant resolution of
performing the right, and are especially careful in instructing
themselves, and who possess also a highly perspicacious intellect,
arrive doubtless at a higher degree of wisdom than others; and I see
that these three particulars are found in great perfection in your
Highness. For, in the first place, your desire of self-instruction
is manifest, from the circumstance that neither the amusements of
the court, nor the accustomed mode of educating ladies, which
ordinarily condemns them to ignorance, have been sufficient to
prevent you from studying with much care all that is best in the
arts and sciences; and the incomparable perspicacity of your
intellect is evinced by this, that you penetrated the secrets of the
sciences and acquired an accurate knowledge of them in a very short
period. But of the vigour of your intellect I have a still stronger
proof, and one peculiar to myself, in that I have never yet met any
one who understood so generally and so well as yourself all that is
contained in my writings. For there are several, even among men of
the highest intellect and learning, who find them very obscure. And
I remark, in almost all those who are versant in Metaphysics, that
they are wholly disinclined from Geometry; and, on the other hand,
that the cultivators of Geometry have no ability for the
investigations of the First Philosophy: insomuch that I can say with
truth I know but one mind, and that is your own, to which both
studies are alike congenial, and which I therefore, with propriety,
designate incomparable. But what most of all enhances my admiration
is, that so accurate and varied an acquaintance with the whole
circle of the sciences is not found in some aged doctor who has
employed many years in contemplation, but in a Princess still young,
and whose countenance and years would more fitly represent one of
the Graces than a Muse or the sage Minerva. In conclusion, I not
only remark in your Highness all that is requisite on the part of
the mind to perfect and sublime wisdom, but also all that can be
required on the part of the will or the manners, in which benignity
and gentleness are so conjoined with majesty that, though fortune
has attacked you with continued injustice, it has failed either to
irritate or crush you. And this constrains me to such veneration
that I not only think this work due to you, since it treats of
philosophy which is the study of wisdom, but likewise feel not more
zeal for my reputation as a philosopher than pleasure in subscribing
myself,--

Of your most Serene Highness, The most devoted servant,

DESCARTES. OF THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. I. THAT in order to seek truth, it is necessary once in the course
of our life, to doubt, as far as possible, of all things. As we were at one time children, and as we formed various judgments
regarding the objects presented to our senses, when as yet we had
not the entire use of our reason, numerous prejudices stand in the
way of our arriving at the knowledge of truth; and of these it seems
impossible for us to rid ourselves, unless we undertake, once in our
lifetime, to doubt of all those things in which we may discover even
the smallest suspicion of uncertainty. II. That we ought also to consider as false all that is doubtful. Moreover, it will be useful likewise to esteem as false the things
of which we shall be able to doubt, that we may with greater
clearness discover what possesses most certainty and is the easiest
to know. III. That we ought not meanwhile to make use of doubt in the
conduct of life. In the meantime, it is to be observed that we are to avail ourselves
of this general doubt only while engaged in the contemplation of
truth. For, as far as concerns the conduct of life, we are very
frequently obliged to follow opinions merely probable, or even
sometimes, though of two courses of action we may not perceive more
probability in the one than in the other, to choose one or other,
seeing the opportunity of acting would not unfrequently pass away
before we could free ourselves from our doubts. IV. Why we may doubt of sensible things. Accordingly, since we now only design to apply ourselves to the
investigation of truth, we will doubt, first, whether of all the
things that have ever fallen under our senses, or which we have ever
imagined, any one really exist; in the first place, because we know
by experience that the senses sometimes err, and it would be
imprudent to trust too much to what has even once deceived us;
secondly, because in dreams we perpetually seem to perceive or
imagine innumerable objects which have no existence. And to one who
has thus resolved upon a general doubt, there appear no marks by
which he can with certainty distinguish sleep from the waking state. V. Why we may also doubt of mathematical demonstrations. We will also doubt of the other things we have before held as most
certain, even of the demonstrations of mathematics, and of their
principles which we have hitherto deemed self-evident; in the first
place, because we have sometimes seen men fall into error in such
matters, and admit as absolutely certain and self evident what to us
appeared false, but chiefly because we have learnt that God who
created us is all-powerful; for we do not yet know whether perhaps
it was his will to create us so that we are always deceived, even in
the things we think we know best: since this does not appear more
impossible than our being occasionally deceived, which, however, as
observation teaches us, is the case. And if we suppose that an all-
powerful God is not the author of our being, and that we exist of
ourselves or by some other means, still, the less powerful we
suppose our author to be, the greater reason will we have for
believing that we are not so perfect as that we may not be
continually deceived. VI. That we possess a free-will, by which we can withhold our
assent from what is doubtful, and thus avoid error. But meanwhile, whoever in the end may be the author of our being,
and however powerful and deceitful he may be, we are nevertheless
conscious of a freedom, by which we can refrain from admitting to a
place in our belief aught that is not manifestly certain and
undoubted, and thus guard against ever being deceived. VII. That we cannot doubt of our existence while we doubt, and that
this is the first knowledge we acquire when we philosophize in
order. While we thus reject all of which we can entertain the smallest
doubt, and even imagine that it is false, we easily indeed suppose
that there is neither God, nor sky, nor bodies, and that we
ourselves even have neither hands nor feet, nor, finally, a body;
but we cannot in the same way suppose that we are not while we doubt
of the truth of these things; for there is a repugnance in
conceiving that what thinks does not exist at the very time when it
thinks. Accordingly, the knowledge, _I_ THINK, THEREFORE _I_ AM, is
the first and most certain that occurs to one who philosophizes
orderly. VIII. That we hence discover the distinction between the mind and
the body, or between a thinking and corporeal thing. And this is the best mode of discovering the nature of the mind, and
its distinctness from the body: for examining what we are, while
supposing, as we now do, that there is nothing really existing apart
from our thought, we clearly perceive that neither extension, nor
figure, nor local motion,[Footnote: Instead of "local motion," the
French has "existence in any place."] nor anything similar that can
be attributed to body, pertains to our nature, and nothing save
thought alone; and, consequently, that the notion we have of our
mind precedes that of any corporeal thing, and is more certain,
seeing we still doubt whether there is any body in existence, while
we already perceive that we think. IX. What thought (COGITATIO) is. By the word thought, I understand all that which so takes place in
us that we of ourselves are immediately conscious of it; and,
accordingly, not only to understand (INTELLIGERE, ENTENDRE), to will
(VELLE), to imagine (IMAGINARI), but even to perceive (SENTIRE,
SENTIR), are here the same as to think (COGITARE, PENSER). For if I
say, I see, or, I walk, therefore I am; and if I understand by
vision or walking the act of my eyes or of my limbs, which is the
work of the body, the conclusion is not absolutely certain, because,
as is often the case in dreams, I may think that I see or walk,
although I do not open my eyes or move from my place, and even,
perhaps, although I have no body: but, if I mean the sensation
itself, or consciousness of seeing or walking, the knowledge is
manifestly certain, because it is then referred to the mind, which
alone perceives or is conscious that it sees or walks. [Footnote: In
the French, "which alone has the power of perceiving, or of being
conscious in any other way whatever."] X. That the notions which are simplest and self-evident, are
obscured by logical definitions; and that such are not to be
reckoned among the cognitions acquired by study, [but as born with
us]. I do not here explain several other terms which I have used, or
design to use in the sequel, because their meaning seems to me
sufficiently self-evident. And I frequently remarked that
philosophers erred in attempting to explain, by logical definitions,
such truths as are most simple and self-evident; for they thus only
rendered them more obscure. And when I said that the proposition,
_I_ THINK, THEREFORE _I_ AM, is of all others the first and most
certain which occurs to one philosophizing orderly, I did not
therefore deny that it was necessary to know what thought,
existence, and certitude are, and the truth that, in order to think
it is necessary to be, and the like; but, because these are the most
simple notions, and such as of themselves afford the knowledge of
nothing existing, I did not judge it proper there to enumerate them. XI. How we can know our mind more clearly than our body. But now that it may be discerned how the knowledge we have of the
mind not only precedes, and has greater certainty, but is even
clearer, than that we have of the body, it must be remarked, as a
matter that is highly manifest by the natural light, that to nothing
no affections or qualities belong; and, accordingly, that where we
observe certain affections, there a thing or substance to which
these pertain, is necessarily found. The same light also shows us
that we know a thing or substance more clearly in proportion as we
discover in it a greater number of qualities. Now, it is manifest
that we remark a greater number of qualities in our mind than in any
other thing; for there is no occasion on which we know anything
whatever when we are not at the same time led with much greater
certainty to the knowledge of our own mind. For example, if I judge
that there is an earth because I touch or see it, on the same
ground, and with still greater reason, I must be persuaded that my
mind exists; for it may be, perhaps, that I think I touch the earth
while there is one in existence; but it is not possible that I
should so judge, and my mind which thus judges not exist; and the
same holds good of whatever object is presented to our mind. XII. How it happens that every one does not come equally to know
this. Those who have not philosophized in order have had other opinions on
this subject, because they never distinguished with sufficient care
the mind from the body. For, although they had no difficulty in
believing that they themselves existed, and that they had a higher
assurance of this than of any other thing, nevertheless, as they did
not observe that by THEMSELVES, they ought here to understand their
MINDS alone [when the question related to metaphysical certainty];
and since, on the contrary, they rather meant their bodies which
they saw with their eyes, touched with their hands, and to which
they erroneously attributed the faculty of perception, they were
prevented from distinctly apprehending the nature of the mind. XIII. In what sense the knowledge of other things depends upon the
knowledge of God. But when the mind, which thus knows itself but is still in doubt as
to all other things, looks around on all sides, with a view to the
farther extension of its knowledge, it first of all discovers within
itself the ideas of many things; and while it simply contemplates
them, and neither affirms nor denies that there is anything beyond
itself corresponding to them, it is in no danger of erring. The mind
also discovers certain common notions out of which it frames various
demonstrations that carry conviction to such a degree as to render
doubt of their truth impossible, so long as we give attention to
them. For example, the mind has within itself ideas of numbers and
figures, and it has likewise among its common notions the principle
THAT IF EQUALS BE ADDED TO EQUALS THE WHOLES WILL BE EQUAL and the
like; from which it is easy to demonstrate that the three angles of
a triangle are equal to two right angles, etc. Now, so long as we
attend to the premises from which this conclusion and others similar
to it were deduced, we feel assured of their truth; but, as the mind
cannot always think of these with attention, when it has the
remembrance of a conclusion without recollecting the order of its
deduction, and is uncertain whether the author of its being has
created it of a nature that is liable to be deceived, even in what
appears most evident, it perceives that there is just ground to
distrust the truth of such conclusions, and that it cannot possess
any certain knowledge until it has discovered its author. XIV. That we may validly infer the existence of God from necessary
existence being comprised in the concept we have of him. When the mind afterwards reviews the different ideas that are in it,
it discovers what is by far the chief among them--that of a Being
omniscient, all-powerful, and absolutely perfect; and it observes
that in this idea there is contained not only possible and
contingent existence, as in the ideas of all other things which it
clearly perceives, but existence absolutely necessary and eternal. And just as because, for example, the equality of its three angles
to two right angles is necessarily comprised in the idea of a
triangle, the mind is firmly persuaded that the three angles of a
triangle are equal to two right angles; so, from its perceiving
necessary and eternal existence to be comprised in the idea which it
has of an all-perfect Being, it ought manifestly to conclude that
this all-perfect Being exists. XV. That necessary existence is not in the same way comprised in
the notions which we have of other things, but merely contingent
existence. The mind will be still more certain of the truth of this conclusion,
if it consider that it has no idea of any other thing in which it
can discover that necessary existence is contained; for, from this
circumstance alone, it will discern that the idea of an all-perfect
Being has not been framed by itself, and that it does not represent
a chimera, but a true and immutable nature, which must exist since
it can only be conceived as necessarily existing. XVI. That prejudices hinder many from clearly knowing the necessity
of the existence of God. Our mind would have no difficulty in assenting to this truth, if it
were, first of all, wholly free from prejudices; but as we have been
accustomed to distinguish, in all other things, essence from
existence, and to imagine at will many ideas of things which neither
are nor have been, it easily happens, when we do not steadily fix
our thoughts on the contemplation of the all-perfect Being, that a
doubt arises as to whether the idea we have of him is not one of
those which we frame at pleasure, or at least of that class to whose
essence existence does not pertain. XVII. That the greater objective (representative) perfection there
is in our idea of a thing, the greater also must be the perfection
of its cause. When we further reflect on the various ideas that are in us, it is
easy to perceive that there is not much difference among them, when
we consider them simply as certain modes of thinking, but that they
are widely different, considered in reference to the objects they
represent; and that their causes must be so much the more perfect
according to the degree of objective perfection contained in them. [Footnote: "as what they represent of their object has more
perfection."--FRENCH.] For there is no difference between this and
the case of a person who has the idea of a machine, in the
construction of which great skill is displayed, in which
circumstances we have a right to inquire how he came by this idea,
whether, for example, he somewhere saw such a machine constructed by
another, or whether he was so accurately taught the mechanical
sciences, or is endowed with such force of genius, that he was able
of himself to invent it, without having elsewhere seen anything like
it; for all the ingenuity which is contained in the idea objectively
only, or as it were in a picture, must exist at least in its first
and chief cause, whatever that may be, not only objectively or
representatively, but in truth formally or eminently. XVIII. That the existence of God may be again inferred from the
above. Thus, because we discover in our minds the idea of God, or of an
all-perfect Being, we have a right to inquire into the source whence
we derive it; and we will discover that the perfections it
represents are so immense as to render it quite certain that we
could only derive it from an all-perfect Being; that is, from a God
really existing. For it is not only manifest by the natural light
that nothing cannot be the cause of anything whatever, and that the
more perfect cannot arise from the less perfect, so as to be thereby
produced as by its efficient and total cause, but also that it is
impossible we can have the idea or representation of anything
whatever, unless there be somewhere, either in us or out of us, an
original which comprises, in reality, all the perfections that are
thus represented to us; but, as we do not in any way find in
ourselves those absolute perfections of which we have the idea, we
must conclude that they exist in some nature different from ours,
that is, in God, or at least that they were once in him; and it most
manifestly follows [from their infinity] that they are still there. XIX. That, although we may not comprehend the nature of God, there
is yet nothing which we know so clearly as his perfections. This will appear sufficiently certain and manifest to those who have
been accustomed to contemplate the idea of God, and to turn their
thoughts to his infinite perfections; for, although we may not
comprehend them, because it is of the nature of the infinite not to
be comprehended by what is finite, we nevertheless conceive them
more clearly and distinctly than material objects, for this reason,
that, being simple, and unobscured by limits,[Footnote: After
LIMITS, "what of them we do conceive is much less confused. There
is, besides, no speculation more calculated to aid in perfecting our
understanding, and which is more important than this, inasmuch as
the consideration of an object that has no limits to its perfections
fills us with satisfaction and assurance."-FRENCH.] they occupy our
mind more fully. XX. That we are not the cause of ourselves, but that this is God,
and consequently that there is a God. But, because every one has not observed this, and because, when we
have an idea of any machine in which great skill is displayed, we
usually know with sufficient accuracy the manner in which we
obtained it, and as we cannot even recollect when the idea we have
of a God was communicated to us by him, seeing it was always in our
minds, it is still necessary that we should continue our review, and
make inquiry after our author, possessing, as we do, the idea of the
infinite perfections of a God: for it is in the highest degree
evident by the natural light, that that which knows something more
perfect than itself, is not the source of its own being, since it
would thus have given to itself all the perfections which it knows;
and that, consequently, it could draw its origin from no other being
than from him who possesses in himself all those perfections, that
is, from God. XXI. That the duration alone of our life is sufficient to
demonstrate the existence of God. The truth of this demonstration will clearly appear, provided we
consider the nature of time, or the duration of things; for this is
of such a kind that its parts are not mutually dependent, and never
co-existent; and, accordingly, from the fact that we now are, it
does not necessarily follow that we shall be a moment afterwards,
unless some cause, viz., that which first produced us, shall, as it
were, continually reproduce us, that is, conserve us. For we easily
understand that there is no power in us by which we can conserve
ourselves, and that the being who has so much power as to conserve
us out of himself, must also by so much the greater reason conserve
himself, or rather stand in need of being conserved by no one
whatever, and, in fine, be God. XXII. That in knowing the existence of God, in the manner here
explained, we likewise know all his attributes, as far as they can
be known by the natural light alone. There is the great advantage in proving the existence of God in this
way, viz., by his idea, that we at the same time know what he is, as
far as the weakness of our nature allows; for, reflecting on the
idea we have of him which is born with us, we perceive that he is
eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, the source of all goodness and
truth, creator of all things, and that, in fine, he has in himself
all that in which we can clearly discover any infinite perfection or
good that is not limited by any imperfection. XXIII. That God is not corporeal, and does not perceive by means of
senses as we do, or will the evil of sin. For there are indeed many things in the world that are to a certain
extent imperfect or limited, though possessing also some perfection;
and it is accordingly impossible that any such can be in God. Thus,
looking to corporeal nature,[Footnote: In the French, "since
extension constitutes the nature of body."] since divisibility is
included in local extension, and this indicates imperfection, it is
certain that God is not body. And although in men it is to some
degree a perfection to be capable of perceiving by means of the
senses, nevertheless since in every sense there is passivity
[Footnote: In the French, "because our perceptions arise from
impressions made upon us from another source," i.e., than
ourselves.] which indicates dependency, we must conclude that God is
in no manner possessed of senses, and that he only understands and
wills, not, however, like us, by acts in any way distinct, but
always by an act that is one, identical, and the simplest possible,
understands, wills, and operates all, that is, all things that in
reality exist; for he does not will the evil of sin, seeing this is
but the negation of being. XXIV. That in passing from the knowledge of God to the knowledge of
the creatures, it is necessary to remember that our understanding is
finite, and the power of God infinite. But as we know that God alone is the true cause of all that is or
can be, we will doubtless follow the best way of philosophizing, if,
from the knowledge we have of God himself, we pass to the
explication of the things which he has created, and essay to deduce
it from the notions that are naturally in our minds, for we will
thus obtain the most perfect science, that is, the knowledge of
effects through their causes. But that we may be able to make this
attempt with sufficient security from error, we must use the
precaution to bear in mind as much as possible that God, who is the
author of things, is infinite, while we are wholly finite. XXV. That we must believe all that God has revealed, although it
may surpass the reach of our faculties. Thus, if perhaps God reveal to us or others, matters concerning
himself which surpass the natural powers of our mind, such as the
mysteries of the incarnation and of the trinity, we will not refuse
to believe them, although we may not clearly understand them; nor
will we be in any way surprised to find in the immensity of his
nature, or even in what he has created, many things that exceed our
comprehension. XXVI. That it is not needful to enter into disputes [Footnote: "to
essay to comprehend the infinite."--FRENCH.] regarding the infinite,
but merely to hold all that in which we can find no limits as
indefinite, such as the extension of the world, the divisibility of
the parts of matter, the number of the stars, etc. We will thus never embarrass ourselves by disputes about the
infinite, seeing it would be absurd for us who are finite to
undertake to determine anything regarding it, and thus as it were to
limit it by endeavouring to comprehend it. We will accordingly give
ourselves no concern to reply to those who demand whether the half
of an infinite line is also infinite, and whether an infinite number
is even or odd, and the like, because it is only such as imagine
their minds to be infinite who seem bound to entertain questions of
this sort. And, for our part, looking to all those things in which
in certain senses, we discover no limits, we will not, therefore,
affirm that they are infinite, but will regard them simply as
indefinite. Thus, because we cannot imagine extension so great that
we cannot still conceive greater, we will say that the magnitude of
possible things is indefinite, and because a body cannot be divided
into parts so small that each of these may not be conceived as again
divided into others still smaller, let us regard quantity as
divisible into parts whose number is indefinite; and as we cannot
imagine so many stars that it would seem impossible for God to
create more, let us suppose that their number is indefinite, and so
in other instances. XXVII. What difference there is between the indefinite and the
infinite. And we will call those things indefinite rather than infinite, with
the view of reserving to God alone the appellation of infinite; in
the first place, because not only do we discover in him alone no
limits on any side, but also because we positively conceive that he
admits of none; and in the second place, because we do not in the
same way positively conceive that other things are in every part
unlimited, but merely negatively admit that their limits, if they
have any, cannot be discovered by us. XXVIII. That we must examine, not the final, but the efficient,
causes of created things. Likewise, finally, we will not seek reasons of natural things from
the end which God or nature proposed to himself in their creation
(i. e., final causes), [Footnote: "We will not stop to consider the
ends which God proposed to himself in the creation of the world, and
we will entirely reject from our philosophy the search of final
causes!"--French.] for we ought not to presume so far as to think
that we are sharers in the counsels of Deity, but, considering him
as the efficient cause of all things, let us endeavour to discover
by the natural light [Footnote: "Faculty of reasoning."--FRENCH.] which he has planted in us, applied to those of his attributes of
which he has been willing we should have some knowledge, what must
be concluded regarding those effects we perceive by our senses;
bearing in mind, however, what has been already said, that we must
only confide in this natural light so long as nothing contrary to
its dictates is revealed by God himself. [Footnote: The last clause,
beginning "bearing in mind." is omitted in the French.] XXIX. That God is not the cause of our errors. The first attribute of God which here falls to be considered, is
that he is absolutely veracious and the source of all light, so that
it is plainly repugnant for him to deceive us, or to be properly and
positively the cause of the errors to which we are consciously
subject; for although the address to deceive seems to be some mark
of subtlety of mind among men, yet without doubt the will to deceive
only proceeds from malice or from fear and weakness, and
consequently cannot be attributed to God. XXX. That consequently all which we clearly perceive is true, and
that we are thus delivered from the doubts above proposed. Whence it follows, that the light of nature, or faculty of knowledge
given us by God, can never compass any object which is not true, in
as far as it attains to a knowledge of it, that is, in as far as the
object is clearly and distinctly apprehended. For God would have
merited the appellation of a deceiver if he had given us this
faculty perverted, and such as might lead us to take falsity for
truth [when we used it aright]. Thus the highest doubt is removed,
which arose from our ignorance on the point as to whether perhaps
our nature was such that we might be deceived even in those things
that appear to us the most evident. The same principle ought also to
be of avail against all the other grounds of doubting that have been
already enumerated. For mathematical truths ought now to be above
suspicion, since these are of the clearest. And if we perceive
anything by our senses, whether while awake or asleep, we will
easily discover the truth provided we separate what there is of
clear and distinct in the knowledge from what is obscure and
confused. There is no need that I should here say more on this
subject, since it has already received ample treatment in the
metaphysical Meditations; and what follows will serve to explain it
still more accurately. XXXI. That our errors are, in respect of God, merely negations,
but, in respect of ourselves, privations. But as it happens that we frequently fall into error, although God
is no deceiver, if we desire to inquire into the origin and cause of
our errors, with a view to guard against them, it is necessary to
observe that they depend less on our understanding than on our will,
and that they have no need of the actual concourse of God, in order
to their production; so that, when considered in reference to God,
they are merely negations, but in reference to ourselves,
privations. XXXII. That there are only two modes of thinking in us, viz., the
perception of the understanding and the action of the will. For all the modes of thinking of which we are conscious may be
referred to two general classes, the one of which is the perception
or operation of the understanding, and the other the volition or
operation of the will. Thus, to perceive by the senses (SENTIRE), to
imagine, and to conceive things purely intelligible, are only
different modes of perceiving (PERCIP IENDI); but to desire, to be
averse from, to affirm, to deny, to doubt, are different modes of
willing. XXXIII. That we never err unless when we judge of something which
we do not sufficiently apprehend. When we apprehend anything we are in no danger of error, if we
refrain from judging of it in any way; and even when we have formed
a judgment regarding it, we would never fall into error, provided we
gave our assent only to what we clearly and distinctly perceived;
but the reason why we are usually deceived, is that we judge without
possessing an exact knowledge of that of which we judge. XXXIV. That the will as well as the understanding is required for
judging. I admit that the understanding is necessary for judging, there being
no room to suppose that we can judge of that which we in no way
apprehend; but the will also is required in order to our assenting
to what we have in any degree perceived. It is not necessary,
however, at least to form any judgment whatever, that we have an
entire and perfect apprehension of a thing; for we may assent to
many things of which we have only a very obscure and confused
knowledge. XXXV. That the will is of greater extension than the understanding,
and is thus the source of our errors. Further, the perception of the intellect extends only to the few
things that are presented to it, and is always very limited: the
will, on the other hand, may, in a certain sense, be said to be
infinite, because we observe nothing that can be the object of the
will of any other, even of the unlimited will of God, to which ours
cannot also extend, so that we easily carry it beyond the objects we
clearly perceive; and when we do this, it is not wonderful that we
happen to be deceived. XXXVI. That our errors cannot be imputed to God. But although God has not given us an omniscient understanding, he is
not on this account to be considered in any wise the author of our
errors, for it is of the nature of created intellect to be finite,
and of finite intellect not to embrace all things. XXXVII. That the chief perfection of man is his being able to act
freely or by will, and that it is this which renders him worthy of
praise or blame. That the will should be the more extensive is in harmony with its
nature: and it is a high perfection in man to be able to act by
means of it, that is, freely; and thus in a peculiar way to be the
master of his own actions, and merit praise or blame. For self-
acting machines are not commended because they perform with
exactness all the movements for which they were adapted, seeing
their motions are carried on necessarily; but the maker of them is
praised on account of the exactness with which they were framed,
because he did not act of necessity, but freely; and, on the same
principle, we must attribute to ourselves something more on this
account, that when we embrace truth, we do so not of necessity, but
freely. XXXVIII. That error is a defect in our mode of acting, not in our
nature; and that the faults of their subjects may be frequently
attributed to other masters, but never to God. It is true, that as often as we err, there is some defect in our
mode of action or in the use of our liberty, but not in our nature,
because this is always the same, whether our judgments be true or
false. And although God could have given to us such perspicacity of
intellect that we should never have erred, we have, notwithstanding,
no right to demand this of him; for, although with us he who was
able to prevent evil and did not is held guilty of it, God is not in
the same way to be reckoned responsible for our errors because he
had the power to prevent them, inasmuch as the dominion which some
men possess over others has been instituted for the purpose of
enabling them to hinder those under them from doing evil, whereas
the dominion which God exercises over the universe is perfectly
absolute and free. For this reason we ought to thank him for the
goods he has given us, and not complain that he has not blessed us
with all which we know it was in his power to impart. XXXIX. That the liberty of our will is self-evident. Finally, it is so manifest that we possess a free will, capable of
giving or withholding its assent, that this truth must be reckoned
among the first and most common notions which are born with us. This, indeed, has already very clearly appeared, for when essaying
to doubt of all things, we went so far as to suppose even that he
who created us employed his limitless power in deceiving us in every
way, we were conscious nevertheless of being free to abstain from
believing what was not in every respect certain and undoubted. But
that of which we are unable to doubt at such a time is as self-
evident and clear as any thing we can ever know. XL. That it is likewise certain that God has fore-ordained all
things. But because what we have already discovered of God, gives us the
assurance that his power is so immense that we would sin in thinking
ourselves capable of ever doing anything which he had not ordained
beforehand, we should soon be embarrassed in great difficulties if
we undertook to harmonise the pre-ordination of God with the freedom
of our will, and endeavoured to comprehend both truths at once. XLI. How the freedom of our will may be reconciled with the Divine
pre-ordination. But, in place of this, we will be free from these embarrassments if
we recollect that our mind is limited, while the power of God, by
which he not only knew from all eternity what is or can be, but also
willed and pre-ordained it, is infinite. It thus happens that we
possess sufficient intelligence to know clearly and distinctly that
this power is in God, but not enough to comprehend how he leaves the
free actions of men indeterminate} and, on the other hand, we have
such consciousness of the liberty and indifference which exists in
ourselves, that there is nothing we more clearly or perfectly
comprehend: [so that the omnipotence of God ought not to keep us
from believing it]. For it would be absurd to doubt of that of which
we are fully conscious, and which we experience as existing in
ourselves, because we do not comprehend another matter which, from
its very nature, we know to be incomprehensible. XLII. How, although we never will to err, it is nevertheless by our
will that we do err. But now since we know that all our errors depend upon our will, and
as no one wishes to deceive himself, it may seem wonderful that
there is any error in our judgments at all. It is necessary to
remark, however, that there is a great difference between willing to
be deceived, and willing to yield assent to opinions in which it
happens that error is found. For though there is no one who
expressly wishes to fall into error, we will yet hardly find any one
who is not ready to assent to things in which, unknown to himself,
error lurks; and it even frequently happens that it is the desire
itself of following after truth that leads those not fully aware of
the order in which it ought to be sought for, to pass judgment on
matters of which they have no adequate knowledge, and thus to fall
into error. XLIII. That we shall never err if we give our assent only to what
we clearly and distinctly perceive. But it is certain we will never admit falsity for truth, so long as
we judge only of that which we clearly and distinctly perceive;
because, as God is no deceiver, the faculty of knowledge which he
has given us cannot be fallacious, nor, for the same reason, the
faculty of will, when we do not extend it beyond the objects we
clearly know. And even although this truth could not be established
by reasoning, the minds of all have been so impressed by nature as
spontaneously to assent to whatever is clearly perceived, and to
experience an impossibility to doubt of its truth. XLIV. That we uniformly judge improperly when we assent to what we
do not clearly perceive, although our judgment may chance to be
true; and that it is frequently our memory which deceives us by
leading us to believe that certain things were formerly sufficiently
understood by us. It is likewise certain that, when we approve of any reason which we
do not apprehend, we are either deceived, or, if we stumble on the
truth, it is only by chance, and thus we can never possess the
assurance that we are not in error. I confess it seldom happens that
we judge of a thing when we have observed we do not apprehend it,
because it is a dictate of the natural light never to judge of what
we do not know. But we most frequently err in this, that we presume
upon a past knowledge of much to which we give our assent, as to
something treasured up in the memory, and perfectly known to us;
whereas, in truth, we have no such knowledge. XLV. What constitutes clear and distinct perception. There are indeed a great many persons who, through their whole
lifetime, never perceive anything in a way necessary for judging of
it properly; for the knowledge upon which we can establish a certain
and indubitable judgment must be not only clear, but also, distinct. I call that clear which is present and manifest to the mind giving
attention to it, just as we are said clearly to see objects when,
being present to the eye looking on, they stimulate it with
sufficient force. and it is disposed to regard them; but the
distinct is that which is so precise and different from all other
objects as to comprehend in itself only what is clear. [Footnote:
"what appears manifestly to him who considers it as he ought." --
FRENCH.] XLVI. It is shown, from the example of pain, that a perception may
be clear without being distinct, but that it cannot be distinct
unless it is clear. For example, when any one feels intense pain, the knowledge which he
has of this pain is very clear, but it is not always distinct; for
men usually confound it with the obscure judgment they form
regarding its nature, and think that there is in the suffering part
something similar to the sensation of pain of which they are alone
conscious. And thus perception may be clear without being distinct,
but it can never be distinct without likewise being clear. XLVII. That, to correct the prejudices of our early years, we must
consider what is clear in each of our simple [Footnote: "first." --
FRENCH.] notions. And, indeed, in our early years, the mind was so immersed in the
body, that, although it perceived many things with sufficient
clearness, it yet knew nothing distinctly; and since even at that
time we exercised our judgment in many matters, numerous prejudices
were thus contracted, which, by the majority, are never afterwards
laid aside. But that we may now be in a position to get rid of
these, I will here briefly enumerate all the simple notions of which
our thoughts are composed, and distinguish in each what is clear
from what is obscure, or fitted to lead into error. XLVIII. That all the objects of our knowledge are to be regarded
either (1) as things or the affections of things: or (2) as eternal
truths; with the enumeration of things. Whatever objects fall under our knowledge we consider either as
things or the affections of things,[Footnote: Things and the
affections of things are (in the French) equivalent to "what has
some (i.e., a REAL) existence," as opposed to the class of "eternal
truths," which have merely an IDEAL existence.] or as eternal truths
possessing no existence beyond our thought. Of the first class the
most general are substance, duration, order, number, and perhaps
also some others, which notions apply to all the kinds of things. I
do not, however, recognise more than two highest kinds (SUMMA
GENERA) of things; the first of intellectual things, or such as have
the power of thinking, including mind or thinking substance and its
properties; the second, of material things, embracing extended
substance, or body and its properties. Perception, volition, and all
modes as well of knowing as of willing, are related to thinking
substance; on the other hand, to extended substance we refer
magnitude, or extension in length, breadth, and depth, figure,
motion, situation, divisibility of parts themselves, and the like. There are, however, besides these, certain things of which we have
an internal experience that ought not to be referred either to the
mind of itself, or to the body alone, but to the close and intimate
union between them, as will hereafter be shown in its place. Of this
class are the appetites of hunger and thirst, etc., and also the
emotions or passions of the mind which are not exclusively mental
affections, as the emotions of anger, joy, sadness, love, etc. ; and,
finally, all the sensations, as of pain, titillation, light and
colours, sounds, smells, tastes, heat, hardness, and the other
tactile qualities. XLIX. That the eternal truths cannot be thus enumerated, but that
this is not necessary. What I have already enumerated we are to regard as things, or the
qualities or modes of things. We now come to speak of eternal
truths. When we apprehend that it is impossible a thing can arise
from nothing, this proposition, EX NIHILO NIHIL FIT, is not
considered as somewhat existing, or as the mode of a thing, but as
an eternal truth having its seat in our mind, and is called a common
notion or axiom. Of this class are the following:--It is impossible
the same thing can at once be and not be; what is done cannot be
undone; he who thinks must exist while he thinks; and innumerable
others, the whole of which it is indeed difficult to enumerate, but
this is not necessary, since, if blinded by no prejudices, we cannot
fail to know them when the occasion of thinking them occurs. L. That these truths are clearly perceived, but not equally by all
men, on account of prejudices. And, indeed, with regard to these common notions, it is not to be
doubted that they can be clearly and distinctly known, for otherwise
they would not merit this appellation: as, in truth, some of them
are not, with respect to all men, equally deserving of the name,
because they are not equally admitted by all: not, however, from
this reason, as I think, that the faculty of knowledge of one man
extends farther than that of another, but rather because these
common notions are opposed to the prejudices of some, who, on this
account, are not able readily to embrace them, even although others,
who are free from those prejudices, apprehend them with the greatest
clearness. LI. What substance is, and that the term is not applicable to God
and the creatures in the same sense. But with regard to what we consider as things or the modes of
things, it is worth while to examine each of them by itself. By
substance we can conceive nothing else than a thing which exists in
such a way as to stand in need of nothing beyond itself in order to
its existence. And, in truth, there can be conceived but one
substance which is absolutely independent, and that is God. We
perceive that all other things can exist only by help of the
concourse of God. And, accordingly, the term substance does not
apply to God and the creatures UNIVOCALLY, to adopt a term familiar
in the schools; that is, no signification of this word can be
distinctly understood which is common to God and them. LII. That the term is applicable univocally to the mind and the
body, and how substance itself is known. Created substances, however, whether corporeal or thinking, may be
conceived under this common concept; for these are things which, in
order to their existence, stand in need of nothing but the concourse
of God. But yet substance cannot be first discovered merely from its
being a thing which exists independently, for existence by itself is
not observed by us. We easily, however, discover substance itself
from any attribute of it, by this common notion, that of nothing
there are no attributes, properties, or qualities: for, from
perceiving that some attribute is present, we infer that some
existing thing or substance to which it may be attributed is also of
necessity present. LIII. That of every substance there is one principal attribute, as
thinking of the mind, extension of the body. But, although any attribute is sufficient to lead us to the
knowledge of substance, there is, however, one principal property of
every substance, which constitutes its nature or essence, and upon
which all the others depend. Thus, extension in length, breadth, and
depth, constitutes the nature of corporeal substance; and thought
the nature of thinking substance. For every other thing that can be
attributed to body, presupposes extension, and is only some mode of
an extended thing; as all the properties we discover in the mind are
only diverse modes of thinking. Thus, for example, we cannot
conceive figure unless in something extended, nor motion unless in
extended space, nor imagination, sensation, or will, unless in a
thinking thing. But, on the other hand, we can conceive extension
without figure or motion, and thought without imagination or
sensation, and so of the others; as is clear to any one who attends
to these matters. LIV. How we may have clear and distinct notions of the substance
which thinks, of that which is corporeal, and of God. And thus we may easily have two clear and distinct notions or ideas,
the one of created substance, which thinks, the other of corporeal
substance, provided we carefully distinguish all the attributes of
thought from those of extension. We may also have a clear and
distinct idea of an uncreated and independent thinking substance,
that is, of God, provided we do not suppose that this idea
adequately represents to us all that is in God, and do not mix up
with it anything fictitious, but attend simply to the characters
that are comprised in the notion we have of him, and which we
clearly know to belong to the nature of an absolutely perfect Being. For no one can deny that there is in us such an idea of God, without
groundlessly supposing that there is no knowledge of God at all in
the human mind. LV. How duration, order, and number may be also distinctly
conceived. We will also have most distinct conceptions of duration, order, and
number, if, in place of mixing up with our notions of them that
which properly belongs to the concept of substance, we merely think
that the duration of a thing is a mode under which we conceive this
thing, in so far as it continues to exist; and, in like manner, that
order and number are not in reality different from things disposed
in order and numbered, but only modes under which we diversely
consider these things. LVI. What are modes, qualities, attributes. And, indeed, we here understand by modes the same with what we
elsewhere designate attributes or qualities. But when we consider
substance as affected or varied by them, we use the term modes; when
from this variation it may be denominated of such a kind, we adopt
the term qualities [to designate the different modes which cause it
to be so named]; and, finally, when we simply regard these modes as
in the substance, we call them attributes. Accordingly, since God
must be conceived as superior to change, it is not proper to say
that there are modes or qualities in him, but simply attributes; and
even in created things that which is found in them always in the
same mode, as existence and duration in the thing which exists and
endures, ought to be called attribute and not mode or quality. LVII. That some attributes exist in the things to which they are
attributed, and others only in our thought; and what duration and
time are. Of these attributes or modes there are some which exist in the
things themselves, and others that have only an existence in our
thought; thus, for example, time, which we distinguish from duration
taken in its generality, and call the measure of motion, is only a
certain mode under which we think duration itself, for we do not
indeed conceive the duration of things that are moved to be
different from the duration of things that are not moved: as is
evident from this, that if two bodies are in motion for an hour, the
one moving quickly and the other slowly, we do not reckon more time
in the one than in the other, although there may be much more motion
in the one of the bodies than in the other. But that we may
comprehend the duration of all things under a common measure, we
compare their duration with that of the greatest and most regular
motions that give rise to years and days, and which we call time;
hence what is so designated is nothing superadded to duration, taken
in its generality, but a mode of thinking. LVIII. That number and all universals are only modes of thought. In the same way number, when it is not considered as in created
things, but merely in the abstract or in general, is only a mode of
thinking; and the same is true of all those general ideas we call
universals. LIX. How universals are formed; and what are the five common, viz.,
genus, species, difference, property, and accident. Universals arise merely from our making use of one and the same idea
in thinking of all individual objects between which there subsists a
certain likeness; and when we comprehend all the objects represented
by this idea under one name, this term likewise becomes universal. For example, when we see two stones, and do not regard their nature
farther than to remark that there are two of them, we form the idea
of a certain number, which we call the binary; and when we
afterwards see two birds or two trees, and merely take notice of
them so far as to observe that there are two of them, we again take
up the same idea as before, which is, accordingly, universal; and we
likewise give to this number the same universal appellation of
binary. In the same way, when we consider a figure of three sides,
we form a certain idea, which we call the idea of a triangle, and we
afterwards make use of it as the universal to represent to our mind
all other figures of three sides. But when we remark more
particularly that of figures of three sides, some have a right angle
and others not, we form the universal idea of a right-angled
triangle, which being related to the preceding as more general, may
be called species; and the right angle the universal difference by
which right-angled triangles are distinguished from all others; and
farther, because the square of the side which sustains the right
angle is equal to the squares of the other two sides, and because
this property belongs only to this species of triangles, we may call
it the universal property of the species. Finally, if we suppose
that of these triangles some are moved and others not, this will be
their universal accident; and, accordingly, we commonly reckon five
universals, viz., genus, species, difference, property, accident. LX. Of distinctions; and first of the real. But number in things themselves arises from the distinction there is
between them: and distinction is threefold, viz., real, modal, and
of reason. The real properly subsists between two or more
substances; and it is sufficient to assure us that two substances
are really mutually distinct, if only we are able clearly and
distinctly to conceive the one of them without the other. For the
knowledge we have of God renders it certain that he can effect all
that of which we have a distinct idea: wherefore, since we have now,
for example, the idea of an extended and corporeal substance, though
we as yet do not know with certainty whether any such thing is
really existent, nevertheless, merely because we have the idea of
it, we may be assured that such may exist; and, if it really exists,
that every part which we can determine by thought must be really
distinct from the other parts of the same substance. In the same
way, since every one is conscious that he thinks, and that he in
thought can exclude from himself every other substance, whether
thinking or extended, it is certain that each of us thus considered
is really distinct from every other thinking and corporeal
substance. And although we suppose that God united a body to a soul
so closely that it was impossible to form a more intimate union, and
thus made a composite whole, the two substances would remain really
distinct, notwithstanding this union; for with whatever tie God
connected them, he was not able to rid himself of the power he
possessed of separating them, or of conserving the one apart from
the other, and the things which God can separate or conserve
separately are really distinct. LXI. Of the modal distinction. There are two kinds of modal distinctions, viz., that between the
mode properly so-called and the substance of which it is a mode, and
that between two modes of the same substance. Of the former we have
an example in this, that we can clearly apprehend substance apart
from the mode which we say differs from it; while, on the other
hand, we cannot conceive this mode without conceiving the substance
itself. There is, for example, a modal distinction between figure or
motion and corporeal substance in which both exist; there is a
similar distinction between affirmation or recollection and the
mind. Of the latter kind we have an illustration in our ability to
recognise the one of two modes apart from the other, as figure apart
from motion, and motion apart from figure; though we cannot think of
either the one or the other without thinking of the common substance
in which they adhere. If, for example, a stone is moved, and is
withal square, we can, indeed, conceive its square figure without
its motion, and reciprocally its motion without its square figure;
but we can conceive neither this motion nor this figure apart from
the substance of the stone. As for the distinction according to
which the mode of one substance is different from another substance,
or from the mode of another substance, as the motion of one body is
different from another body or from the mind, or as motion is
different from doubt, it seems to me that it should be called real
rather than modal, because these modes cannot be clearly conceived
apart from the really distinct substances of which they are the
modes. LXII. Of the distinction of reason (logical distinction). Finally, the distinction of reason is that between a substance and
some one of its attributes, without which it is impossible, however,
we can have a distinct conception of the substance itself; or
between two such attributes of a common substance, the one of which
we essay to think without the other. This distinction is manifest
from our inability to form a clear and distinct idea of such
substance, if we separate from it such attribute; or to have a clear
perception of the one of two such attributes if we separate it from
the other. For example, because any substance which ceases to endure
ceases also to exist, duration is not distinct from substance except
in thought (RATIONE); and in general all the modes of thinking which
we consider as in objects differ only in thought, as well from the
objects of which they are thought as from each other in a common
object. [Footnote: "and generally all the attributes that lead us to
entertain different thoughts of the same thing, such as, for
example, the extension of body and its property of divisibility, do
not differ from the body which is to us the object of them, or from
each other, unless as we sometimes confusedly think the one without
thinking the other."--FRENCH.] It occurs, indeed, to me that I have
elsewhere classed this kind of distinction with the modal (viz.,
towards the end of the Reply to the First Objections to the
Meditations on the First Philosophy); but there it was only
necessary to treat of these distinctions generally, and it was
sufficient for my purpose at that time simply to distinguish both of
them from the real. LXIII. How thought and extension may be distinctly known, as
constituting, the one the nature of mind, the other that of body. Thought and extension may be regarded as constituting the natures of
intelligent and corporeal substance; and then they must not be
otherwise conceived than as the thinking and extended substances
themselves, that is, as mind and body, which in this way are
conceived with the greatest clearness and distinctness. Moreover, we
more easily conceive extended or thinking substance than substance
by itself, or with the omission of its thinking or extension. For
there is some difficulty in abstracting the notion of substance from
the notions of thinking and extension, which, in truth, are only
diverse in thought itself (i.e., logically different); and a concept
is not more distinct because it comprehends fewer properties, but
because we accurately distinguish what is comprehended in it from
all other notions. LXIV. How these may likewise be distinctly conceived as modes of
substance. Thought and extension may be also considered as modes of substance;
in as far, namely, as the same mind may have many different
thoughts, and the same body, with its size unchanged, may be
extended in several diverse ways, at one time more in length and
less in breadth or depth, and at another time more in breadth and
less in length; and then they are modally distinguished from
substance, and can be conceived not less clearly and distinctly,
provided they be not regarded as substances or things separated from
others, but simply as modes of things. For by regarding them as in
the substances of which they are the modes, we distinguish them from
these substances, and take them for what in truth they are: whereas,
on the other hand, if we wish to consider them apart from the
substances in which they are, we should by this itself regard them
as self-subsisting things, and thus confound the ideas of mode and
substance. LXV. How we may likewise know their modes. In the same way we will best apprehend the diverse modes of thought,
as intellection, imagination, recollection, volition, etc., and also
the diverse modes of extension, or those that belong to extension,
as all figures, the situation of parts and their motions, provided
we consider them simply as modes of the things in which they are;
and motion as far as it is concerned, provided we think merely of
locomotion, without seeking to know the force that produces it, and
which nevertheless I will essay to explain in its own place. LXVI. How our sensations, affections, and appetites may be clearly
known, although we are frequently wrong in our judgments regarding
them. There remain our sensations, affections, and appetites, of which we
may also have a clear knowledge, if we take care to comprehend in
the judgments we form of them only that which is precisely contained
in our perception of them, and of which we are immediately
conscious. There is, however, great difficulty in observing this, at
least in respect of sensations; because we have all, without
exception, from our youth judged that all the things we perceived by
our senses had an existence beyond our thought, and that they were
entirely similar to the sensations, that is, perceptions, we had of
them. Thus when, for example, we saw a certain colour, we thought we
saw something occupying a place out of us, and which was entirely
similar to that idea of colour we were then conscious of; and from
the habit of judging in this way, we seemed to see this so clearly
and distinctly that we esteemed it (i.e., the externality of the
colour) certain and indubitable. LXVII. That we are frequently deceived in our judgments regarding
pain itself. The same prejudice has place in all our other sensations, even in
those of titillation and pain. For though we are not in the habit of
believing that there exist out of us objects that resemble
titillation and pain, we do not nevertheless consider these
sensations as in the mind alone, or in our perception, but as in the
hand, or foot, or some other part of our body. There is no reason,
however, to constrain us to believe that the pain, for example,
which we feel, as it were, in the foot is something out of the mind
existing in the foot, or that the light which we see, as it were, in
the sun exists in the sun as it is in us. Both these beliefs are
prejudices of our early years, as will clearly appear in the sequel. LXVIII. How in these things what we clearly conceive is to be
distinguished from that in which we may be deceived. But that we may distinguish what is clear in our sensations from
what is obscure, we ought most carefully to observe that we possess
a clear and distinct knowledge of pain, colour, and other things of
this sort, when we consider them simply as sensations or thoughts;
but that, when they are judged to be certain things subsisting
beyond our mind, we are wholly unable to form any conception of
them. Indeed, when any one tells us that he sees colour in a body or
feels pain in one of his limbs, this is exactly the same as if he
said that he there saw or felt something of the nature of which he
was entirely ignorant, or that he did not know what he saw or felt. For although, when less attentively examining his thoughts, a person
may easily persuade himself that he has some knowledge of it, since
he supposes that there is something resembling that sensation of
colour or of pain of which he is conscious; yet, if he reflects on
what the sensation of colour or pain represents to him as existing
in a coloured body or in a wounded member, he will find that of such
he has absolutely no knowledge. LXIX. That magnitude, figure, etc., are known far differently from
colour, pain, etc. What we have said above will be more manifest; especially if we
consider that size in the body perceived, figure, motion (at least
local, for philosophers by fancying other kinds of motion have
rendered its nature less intelligible to themselves), the situation
of parts, duration, number, and those other properties which, as we
have already said, we clearly perceive in all bodies, are known by
us in a way altogether different from that in which we know what
colour is in the same body, or pain, smell, taste, or any other of
those properties which I have said above must be referred to the
senses. For although when we see a body we are not less assured of
its existence from its appearing figured than from its appearing
coloured,[Footnote: "by the colour we perceive on occasion of it." --
FRENCH.] we yet know with far greater clearness its property of
figure than its colour. LXX. That we may judge of sensible things in two ways, by the one
of which we avoid error, by the other fall into it. It is thus manifest that to say we perceive colours in objects is in
reality equivalent to saying we perceive something in objects and
are yet ignorant of what it is, except as that which determines in
us a certain highly vivid and clear sensation, which we call the
sensation of colours. There is, however, very great diversity in the
manner of judging: for so long as we simply judge that there is an
unknown something in objects (that is, in things such as they are,
from which the sensation reached us), so far are we from falling
into error that, on the contrary, we thus rather provide against it,
for we are less apt to judge rashly of a thing which we observe we
do not know. But when we think we perceive colours in objects,
although we are in reality ignorant of what we then denominate
colour, and are unable to conceive any resemblance between the
colour we suppose to be in objects, and that of which we are
conscious in sensation, yet because we do not observe this, or
because there are in objects several properties, as size, figure,
number, etc., which, as we clearly know, exist, or may exist in them
as they are perceived by our senses or conceived by our
understanding, we easily glide into the error of holding that what
is called colour in objects is something entirely resembling the
colour we perceive, and thereafter of supposing that we have a clear
perception of what is in no way perceived by us. LXXI. That the chief cause of our errors is to be found in the
prejudices of our childhood. And here we may notice the first and chief cause of our errors. In
early life the mind was so closely bound to the body that it
attended to nothing beyond the thoughts by which it perceived the
objects that made impression on the body; nor as yet did it refer
these thoughts to anything existing beyond itself, but simply felt
pain when the body was hurt, or pleasure when anything beneficial to
the body occurred, or if the body was so highly affected that it was
neither greatly benefited nor hurt, the mind experienced the
sensations we call tastes, smells, sounds, heat, cold, light,
colours, and the like, which in truth are representative of nothing
existing out of our mind, and which vary according to the
diversities of the parts and modes in which the body is affected. [Footnote: "which vary according to the diversities of the movements
that pass from all parts of our body to the part of the brain to
which it (the mind) is closely joined and united."--FRENCH.] The
mind at the same time also perceived magnitudes, figures, motions,
and the like, which were not presented to it as sensations but as
things or the modes of things existing, or at least capable of
existing out of thought, although it did not yet observe this
difference between these two kinds of perceptions. And afterwards
when the machine of the body, which has been so fabricated by nature
that it can of its own inherent power move itself in various ways,
by turning itself at random on every side, followed after what was
useful and avoided what was detrimental; the mind, which was closely
connected with it, reflecting on the objects it pursued or avoided,
remarked, for the first time, that they existed out of itself, and
not only attributed to them magnitudes, figures, motions, and the
like, which it apprehended either as things or as the modes of
things, but, in addition, attributed to them tastes, odours, and the
other ideas of that sort, the sensations of which were caused by
itself; [Footnote: "which it perceived on occasion of them" (i.e.,
of external objects).--FRENCH.] and as it only considered other
objects in so far as they were useful to the body, in which it was
immersed, it judged that there was greater or less reality in each
object, according as the impressions it caused on the body were more
or less powerful. Hence arose the belief that there was more
substance or body in rocks and metals than in air or water, because
the mind perceived in them more hardness and weight. Moreover, the
air was thought to be merely nothing so long as we experienced no
agitation of it by the wind, or did not feel it hot or cold. And
because the stars gave hardly more light than the slender flames of
candles, we supposed that each star was but of this size. Again,
since the mind did not observe that the earth moved on its axis, or
that its superficies was curved like that of a globe, it was on that
account more ready to judge the earth immovable and its surface
flat. And our mind has been imbued from our infancy with a thousand
other prejudices of the same sort which afterwards in our youth we
forgot we had accepted without sufficient examination, and admitted
as possessed of the highest truth and clearness, as if they had been
known by means of our senses, or implanted in us by nature. LXXII. That the second cause of our errors is that we cannot forget
these prejudices. And although now in our mature years, when the mind, being no longer
wholly subject to the body, is not in the habit of referring all
things to it, but also seeks to discover the truth of things
considered in themselves, we observe the falsehood of a great many
of the judgments we had before formed; yet we experience a
difficulty in expunging them from our memory, and, so long as they
remain there, they give rise to various errors. Thus, for example,
since from our earliest years we imagined the stars to be of very
small size, we find it highly difficult to rid ourselves of this
imagination, although assured by plain astronomical reasons that
they are of the greatest,--so prevailing is the power of
preconceived opinion. LXXIII. The third cause is, that we become fatigued by attending to
those objects which are not present to the senses; and that we are
thus accustomed to judge of these not from present perception but
from pre-conceived opinion. Besides, our mind cannot attend to any object without at length
experiencing some pain and fatigue; and of all objects it has the
greatest difficulty in attending to those which are present neither
to the senses nor to the imagination: whether for the reason that
this is natural to it from its union with the body, or because in
our early years, being occupied merely with perceptions and
imaginations, it has become more familiar with, and acquired greater
facility in thinking in those modes than in any other. Hence it also
happens that many are unable to conceive any substance except what
is imaginable and corporeal, and even sensible. For they are
ignorant of the circumstance, that those objects alone are
imaginable which consist in extension, motion, and figure, while
there are many others besides these that are intelligible; and they
persuade themselves that nothing can subsist but body, and, finally,
that there is no body which is not sensible. And since in truth we
perceive no object such as it is by sense alone [but only by our
reason exercised upon sensible objects], as will hereafter be
clearly shown, it thus happens that the majority during life
perceive nothing unless in a confused way. LXXIV. The fourth source of our errors is, that we attach our
thoughts to words which do not express them with accuracy. Finally, since for the use of speech we attach all our conceptions
to words by which to express them, and commit to memory our thoughts
in connection with these terms, and as we afterwards find it more
easy to recall the words than the things signified by them, we can
scarcely conceive anything with such distinctness as to separate
entirely what we conceive from the words that were selected to
express it. On this account the majority attend to words rather than
to things; and thus very frequently assent to terms without
attaching to them any meaning, either because they think they once
understood them, or imagine they received them from others by whom
they were correctly understood. This, however, is not the place to
treat of this matter in detail, seeing the nature of the human body
has not yet been expounded, nor the existence even of body
established; enough, nevertheless, appears to have been said to
enable one to distinguish such of our conceptions as are clear and
distinct from those that are obscure and confused. LXXV. Summary of what must be observed in order to philosophize
correctly. Wherefore if we would philosophize in earnest, and give ourselves to
the search after all the truths we are capable of knowing, we must,
in the first place, lay aside our prejudices; in other words, we
must take care scrupulously to withhold our assent from the opinions
we have formerly admitted, until upon new examination we discover
that they are true. We must, in the next place, make an orderly
review of the notions we have in our minds, and hold as true all and
only those which we will clearly and distinctly apprehend. In this
way we will observe, first of all, that we exist in so far as it is
our nature to think, and at the same time that there is a God upon
whom we depend; and after considering his attributes we will be able
to investigate the truth of all other things, since God is the cause
of them. Besides the notions we have of God and of our mind, we will
likewise find that we possess the knowledge of many propositions
which are eternally true, as, for example, that nothing cannot be
the cause of anything, etc. We will farther discover in our minds
the knowledge of a corporeal or extended nature that may be moved,
divided, etc., and also of certain sensations that affect us, as of
pain, colours, tastes, etc., although we do not yet know the cause
of our being so affected; and, comparing what we have now learne'd,
by examining those things in their order, with our former confused
knowledge of them, we will acquire the habit of forming clear and
distinct conceptions of all the objects we are capable of knowing. In these few precepts seem to me to be comprised the most general
and important principles of human knowledge. LXXVI. That we ought to prefer the Divine authority to our
perception; [Footnote: "reasonings."--FRENCH]. but that, apart from
things revealed, we ought to assent to nothing that we do not
clearly apprehend. Above all, we must impress on our memory the infallible rule, that
what God has revealed is incomparably more certain than anything
else; and that, we ought to submit our belief to the Divine
authority rather than to our own judgment, even although perhaps the
light of reason should, with the greatest clearness and evidence,
appear to suggest to us something contrary to what is revealed. But
in things regarding which there is no revelation, it is by no means
consistent with the character of a philosopher to accept as true
what he has not ascertained to be such, and to trust more to the
senses, in other words, to the inconsiderate judgments of childhood
than to the dictates of mature reason. PART II. OF THE PRINCIPLES OF MATERIAL THINGS. I. The grounds on which the existence of material things may be
known with certainty. Although we are all sufficiently persuaded of the existence of
material things, yet, since this was before called in question by
us, and since we reckoned the persuasion of their existence as among
the prejudices of our childhood, it is now necessary for us to
investigate the grounds on which this truth may be known with
certainty. In the first place, then, it cannot be doubted that every
perception we have comes to us from some object different from our
mind; for it is not in our power to cause ourselves to experience
one perception rather than another, the perception being entirely
dependent on the object which affects our senses. It may, indeed, be
matter of inquiry whether that object be God, or something different
from God; but because we perceive, or rather, stimulated by sense,
clearly and distinctly apprehend, certain matter extended in length,
breadth, and thickness, the various parts of which have different
figures and motions, and give rise to the sensation we have of
colours, smells, pain, etc., God would, without question, deserve to
be regarded as a deceiver, if he directly and of himself presented
to our mind the idea of this extended matter, or merely caused it to
be presented to us by some object which possessed neither extension,
figure, nor motion. For we clearly conceive this matter as entirely
distinct from God, and from ourselves, or our mind; and appear even
clearly to discern that the idea of it is formed in us on occasion
of objects existing out of our minds, to which it is in every
respect similar. But since God cannot deceive us, for this is
repugnant to his nature, as has been already remarked, we must
unhesitatingly conclude that there exists a certain object extended
in length, breadth, and thickness, and possessing all those
properties which we clearly apprehend to belong to what is extended. And this extended substance is what we call body or matter. II. How we likewise know that the human body is closely connected
with the mind. We ought also to conclude that a certain body is more closely united
to our mind than any other, because we clearly observe that pain and
other sensations affect us without our foreseeing them; and these,
the mind is conscious, do not arise from itself alone, nor pertain
to it, in so far as it is a thing which thinks, but only in so far
as it is united to another thing extended and movable, which is
called the human body. But this is not the place to treat in detail
of this matter. III. That the perceptions of the senses do not teach us what is in
reality in things, but what is beneficial of hurtful to the
composite whole of mind and body. It will be sufficient to remark that the perceptions of the senses
are merely to be referred to this intimate union of the human body
and mind, and that they usually make us aware of what, in external
objects, may be useful or adverse to this union, but do not present
to us these objects as they are in themselves, unless occasionally
and by accident. For, after this observation, we will without
difficulty lay aside the prejudices of the senses, and will have
recourse to our understanding alone on this question by reflecting
carefully on the ideas implanted in it by nature. IV. That the nature of body consists not in weight hardness, colour
and the like, but in extension alone. In this way we will discern that the nature of matter or body,
considered in general, does not consist in its being hard, or
ponderous, or coloured, or that which affects our senses in any
other way, but simply in its being a substance extended in length,
breadth, and depth. For with respect to hardness, we know nothing of
it by sense farther than that the parts of hard bodies resist the
motion of our hands on coming into contact with them; but if every
time our hands moved towards any part, all the bodies in that place
receded as quickly as our hands approached, we should never feel
hardness; and yet we have no reason to believe that bodies which
might thus recede would on this account lose that which makes them
bodies. The nature of body does not, therefore, consist in hardness. In the same way, it may be shown that weight, colour, and all the
other qualities of this sort, which are perceived in corporeal
matter, may be taken from it, itself meanwhile remaining entire: it
thus follows that the nature of body depends on none of these. V. That the truth regarding the nature of body is obscured by the
opinions respecting rarefaction and a vacuum with which we are pre-
occupied. There still remain two causes to prevent its being fully admitted
that the true nature of body consists in extension alone. The first
is the prevalent opinion, that most bodies admit of being so
rarefied and condensed that, when rarefied, they have greater
extension than when condensed; and some even have subtilized to such
a degree as to make a distinction between the substance of body and
its quantity, and between quantity itself and extension. The second
cause is this, that where we conceive only extension in length,
breadth, and depth, we are not in the habit of saying that body is
there, but only space and further void space, which the generality
believe to be a mere negation. VI. In what way rarefaction takes place. But with regard to rarefaction and condensation, whoever gives his
attention to his own thoughts, and admits nothing of which he is not
clearly conscious, will not suppose that there is anything in those
processes further than a change of figure in the body rarefied or
condensed: so that, in other words, rare bodies are those between
the parts of which there are numerous distances filled with other
bodies; and dense bodies, on the other hand, those whose parts
approaching each other, either diminish these distances or take them
wholly away, in the latter of which cases the body is rendered
absolutely dense. The body, however, when condensed, has not,
therefore, less extension than when the parts embrace a greater
space, owing to their removal from each other, and their dispersion
into branches. For we ought not to attribute to it the extension of
the pores or distances which its parts do not occupy when it is
rarefied, but to the other bodies that fill these interstices; just
as when we see a sponge full of water or any other liquid, we do not
suppose that each part of the sponge has on this account greater
extension than when compressed and dry, but only that its pores are
wider, and therefore that the body is diffused over a larger space. VII. That rarefaction cannot be intelligibly explained unless in
the way here proposed. And indeed I am unable to discover the force of the reasons which
have induced some to say that rarefaction is the result of the
augmentation of the quantity of body, rather than to explain it on
the principle exemplified in the case of a sponge. For although when
air or water is rarefied we do not see any of the pores that are
rendered large, or the new body that is added to occupy them, it is
yet less agreeable to reason to suppose something that is
unintelligible for the purpose of giving a verbal and merely
apparent explanation of the rarefaction of bodies, than to conclude,
because of their rarefaction, that there are pores or distances
between the parts which are increased in size, and filled with some
new body. Nor ought we to refrain from assenting to this
explanation, because we perceive this new body by none of our
senses, for there is no reason which obliges us to believe that we
should perceive by our senses all the bodies in existence. And we
see that it is very easy to explain rarefaction in this manner, but
impossible in any other; for, in fine, there would be, as appears to
me, a manifest contradiction in supposing that any body was
increased by a quantity or extension which it had not before,
without the addition to it of a new extended substance, in other
words, of another body, because it is impossible to conceive any
addition of extension or quantity to a thing without supposing the
addition of a substance having quantity or extension, as will more
clearly appear from what follows. VIII. That quantity and number differ only in thought (RATIONE)
from that which has quantity and is numbered. For quantity differs from extended substance, and number from what
is numbered, not in reality but merely in our thought; so that, for
example, we may consider the whole nature of a corporeal substance
which is comprised in a space of ten feet, although we do not attend
to this measure of ten feet, for the obvious reason that the thing
conceived is of the same nature in any part of that space as in the
whole; and, on the other hand, we can conceive the number ten, as
also a continuous quantity of ten feet, without thinking of this
determinate substance, because the concept of the number ten is
manifestly the same whether we consider a number of ten feet or ten
of anything else; and we can conceive a continuous quantity of ten
feet without thinking of this or that determinate substance,
although we cannot conceive it without some extended substance of
which it is the quantity. It is in reality, however, impossible that
any, even the least part, of such quantity or extension, can be
taken away, without the retrenchment at the same time of as much of
the substance, nor, on the other hand, can we lessen the substance,
without at the same time taking as much from the quantity or
extension. IX. That corporeal substance, when distinguished from its quantity,
is confusedly conceived as something incorporeal. Although perhaps some express themselves otherwise on this matter, I
am nevertheless convinced that they do not think differently from
what I have now said: for when they distinguish (corporeal)
substance from extension or quantity, they either mean nothing by
the word (corporeal) substance, or they form in their minds merely a
confused idea of incorporeal substance, which they falsely attribute
to corporeal, and leave to extension the true idea of this corporeal
substance; which extension they call an accident, but with such
impropriety as to make it easy to discover that their words are not
in harmony with their thoughts. X. What space or internal place is. Space or internal place, and the corporeal substance which is
comprised in it, are not different in reality, but merely in the
mode in which they are wont to be conceived by us. For, in truth,
the same extension in length, breadth, and depth, which constitutes
space, constitutes body; and the difference between them lies only
in this, that in body we consider extension as particular, and
conceive it to change with the body; whereas in space we attribute
to extension a generic unity, so that after taking from a certain
space the body which occupied it, we do not suppose that we have at
the same time removed the extension of the space, because it appears
to us that the same extension remains there so long as it is of the
same magnitude and figure, and preserves the same situation in
respect to certain bodies around it, by means of which we determine
this space. XI. How space is not in reality different from corporeal substance. And indeed it will be easy to discern that it is the same extension
which constitutes the nature of body as of space, and that these two
things are mutually diverse only as the nature of the genus and
species differs from that of the individual, provided we reflect on
the idea we have of any body, taking a stone for example, and reject
all that is not essential to the nature of body. In the first place,
then, hardness may be rejected, because if the stone were liquefied
or reduced to powder, it would no longer possess hardness, and yet
would not cease to be a body; colour also may be thrown out of
account, because we have frequently seen stones so transparent as to
have no colour; again, we may reject weight, because we have the
case of fire, which, though very light, is still a body; and,
finally, we may reject cold, heat, and all the other qualities of
this sort, either because they are not considered as in the stone,
or because, with the change of these qualities, the stone is not
supposed to have lost the nature of body. After this examination we
will find that nothing remains in the idea of body, except that it
is something extended in length, breadth, and depth; and this
something is comprised in our idea of space, not only of that which
is full of body, but even of what is called void space. XII. How space differs from body in our mode of conceiving it. There is, however, some difference between them in the mode of
conception; for if we remove a stone from the space or place in
which it was, we conceive that its extension also is taken away,
because we regard this as particular, and inseparable from the stone
itself: but meanwhile we suppose that the same extension of place in
which this stone was remains, although the place of the stone be
occupied by wood, water, air, or by any other body, or be even
supposed vacant, because we now consider extension in general, and
think that the same is common to stones, wood, water, air, and other
bodies, and even to a vacuum itself, if there is any such thing,
provided it be of the same magnitude and figure as before, and
preserve the same situation among the external bodies which
determine this space. XIII. What external place is. The reason of which is, that the words place and space signify
nothing really different from body which is said to be in place, but
merely designate its magnitude, figure, and situation among other
bodies. For it is necessary, in order to determine this situation,
to regard certain other bodies which we consider as immovable; and,
according as we look to different bodies, we may see that the same
thing at the same time does and does not change place. For example,
when a vessel is being carried out to sea, a person sitting at the
stern may be said to remain always in one place, if we look to the
parts of the vessel, since with respect to these he preserves the
same situation; and on the other hand, if regard be had to the
neighbouring shores, the same person will seem to be perpetually
changing place, seeing he is constantly receding from one shore and
approaching another. And besides, if we suppose that the earth
moves, and that it makes precisely as much way from west to east as
the vessel from east to west, we will again say that the person at
the stern does not change his place, because this place will be
determined by certain immovable points which we imagine to be in the
heavens. But if at length we are persuaded that there are no points
really immovable in the universe, as will hereafter be shown to be
probable, we will thence conclude that nothing has a permanent place
unless in so far as it is fixed by our thought. XIV. Wherein place and space differ. The terms place and space, however, differ in signification, because
place more expressly designates situation than magnitude or figure,
while, on the other hand, we think of the latter when we speak of
space. For we frequently say that a thing succeeds to the place of
another, although it be not exactly of the same magnitude or figure;
but we do not therefore admit that it occupies the same space as the
other; and when the situation is changed we say that the place also
is changed, although there are the same magnitude and figure as
before: so that when we say that a thing is in a particular place,
we mean merely that it is situated in a determinate way in respect
of certain other objects; and when we add that it occupies such a
space or place, we understand besides that it is of such determinate
magnitude and figure as exactly to fill this space. XV. How external place is rightly taken for the superficies of the
surrounding body. And thus we never indeed distinguish space from extension in length,
breadth, and depth; we sometimes, however, consider place as in the
thing placed, and at other times as out of it. Internal place indeed
differs in no way from space; but external place may be taken for
the superficies that immediately surrounds the thing placed. It
ought to be remarked that by superficies we do not here understand
any part of the surrounding body, but only the boundary between the
surrounding and surrounded bodies, which is nothing more than a
mode; or at least that we speak of superficies in general which is
no part of one body rather than another, but is always considered
the same, provided it retain the same magnitude and figure. For
although the whole surrounding body with its superficies were
changed, it would not be supposed that the body which was surrounded
by it had therefore changed its place, if it meanwhile preserved the
same situation with respect to the other bodies that are regarded as
immovable. Thus, if we suppose that a boat is carried in one
direction by the current of a stream, and impelled by the wind in
the opposite with an equal force, so that its situation with respect
to the banks is not changed, we will readily admit that it remains
in the same place, although the whole superficies which surrounds it
is incessantly changing. XVI. That a vacuum or space in which there is absolutely no body is
repugnant to reason. With regard to a vacuum, in the philosophical sense of the term,
that is, a space in which there is no substance, it is evident that
such does not exist, seeing the extension of space or internal place
is not different from that of body. For since from this alone, that
a body has extension in length, breadth, and depth, we have reason
to conclude that it is a substance, it being absolutely
contradictory that nothing should possess extension, we ought to
form a similar inference regarding the space which is supposed void,
viz., that since there is extension in it there is necessarily also
substance. XVII. That a vacuum in the ordinary use of the term does not
exclude all body. And, in truth, by the term vacuum in its common use, we do not mean
a place or space in which there is absolutely nothing, but only a
place in which there is none of those things we presume ought to be
there. Thus, because a pitcher is made to hold water, it is said to
be empty when it is merely filled with air; or if there are no fish
in a fish-pond, we say there is nothing in it, although it be full
of water; thus a vessel is said to be empty, when, in place of the
merchandise which it was designed to carry, it is loaded with sand
only, to enable it to resist the violence of the wind; and, finally,
it is in the same sense that we say space is void when it contains
nothing sensible, although it contain created and self-subsisting
matter; for we are not in the habit of considering the bodies near
us, unless in so far as they cause in our organs of sense,
impressions strong enough to enable us to perceive them. And if, in
place of keeping in mind what ought to be understood by these terms
a vacuum and nothing, we afterwards suppose that in the space we
called a vacuum, there is not only no sensible object, but no object
at all, we will fall into the same error as if, because a pitcher in
which there is nothing but air, is, in common speech, said to be
empty, we were therefore to judge that the air contained in it is
not a substance (RES SUBSISTENS). XVIII. How the prejudice of an absolute vacuum is to be corrected. We have almost all fallen into this error from the earliest age,
for, observing that there is no necessary connection between a
vessel and the body it contains, we thought that God at least could
take from a vessel the body which occupied it, without it being
necessary that any other should be put in the place of the one
removed. But that we may be able now to correct this false opinion,
it is necessary to remark that there is in truth no connection
between the vessel and the particular body which it contains, but
that there is an absolutely necessary connection between the concave
figure of the vessel and the extension considered generally which
must be comprised in this cavity; so that it is not more
contradictory to conceive a mountain without a valley than such a
cavity without the extension it contains, or this extension apart
from an extended substance, for, as we have often said, of nothing
there can be no extension. And accordingly, if it be asked what
would happen were God to remove from a vessel all the body contained
in it, without permitting another body to occupy its place, the
answer must be that the sides of the vessel would thus come into
proximity with each other. For two bodies must touch each other when
there is nothing between them, and it is manifestly contradictory
for two bodies to be apart, in other words, that there should be a
distance between them, and this distance yet be nothing; for all
distance is a mode of extension, and cannot therefore exist without
an extended substance. XIX. That this confirms what was said of rarefaction. After we have thus remarked that the nature of corporeal substance
consists only in its being an extended thing, and that its extension
is not different from that which we attribute to space, however
empty, it is easy to discover the impossibility of any one of its
parts in any way whatsoever occupying more space at one time than at
another, and thus of being otherwise rarefied than in the way
explained above; and it is easy to perceive also that there cannot
be more matter or body in a vessel when it is filled with lead or
gold, or any other body however heavy and hard, than when it but
contains air and is supposed to be empty: for the quantity of the
parts of which a body is composed does not depend on their weight or
hardness, but only on the extension, which is always equal in the
same vase. XX. That from this the non-existence of atoms may likewise be
demonstrated. We likewise discover that there cannot exist any atoms or parts of
matter that are of their own nature indivisible. For however small
we suppose these parts to be, yet because they are necessarily
extended, we are always able in thought to divide any one of them
into two or more smaller parts, and may accordingly admit their
divisibility. For there is nothing we can divide in thought which we
do not thereby recognize to be divisible; and, therefore, were we to
judge it indivisible our judgment would not be in harmony with the
knowledge we have of the thing; and although we should even suppose
that God had reduced any particle of matter to a smallness so
extreme that it did not admit of being further divided, it would
nevertheless be improperly styled indivisible, for though God had
rendered the particle so small that it was not in the power of any
creature to divide it, he could not however deprive himself of the
ability to do so, since it is absolutely impossible for him to
lessen his own omnipotence, as was before observed. Wherefore,
absolutely speaking, the smallest extended particle is always
divisible, since it is such of its very nature. XXI. It is thus also demonstrated that the extension of the world
is indefinite. We further discover that this world or the whole (universitas) of
corporeal substance, is extended without limit, for wherever we fix
a limit, we still not only imagine beyond it spaces indefinitely
extended, but perceive these to be truly imaginable, in other words,
to be in reality such as we imagine them; so that they contain in
them corporeal substance indefinitely extended, for, as has been
already shown at length, the idea of extension which we conceive in
any space whatever is plainly identical with the idea of corporeal
substance. XXII. It also follows that the matter of the heavens and earth is
the same, and that there cannot be a plurality of worlds. And it may also be easily inferred from all this that the earth and
heavens are made of the same matter; and that even although there
were an infinity of worlds, they would all be composed of this
matter; from which it follows that a plurality of worlds is
impossible, because we clearly conceive that the matter whose nature
consists only in its being an extended substance, already wholly
occupies all the imaginable spaces where these other worlds could
alone be, and we cannot find in ourselves the idea of any other
matter. XXIII. That all the variety of matter, or the diversity of its
forms, depends on motion. There is therefore but one kind of matter in the whole universe, and
this we know only by its being extended. All the properties we
distinctly perceive to belong to it are reducible to its capacity of
being divided and moved according to its parts; and accordingly it
is capable of all those affections which we perceive can arise from
the motion of its parts. For the partition of matter in thought
makes no change in it; but all variation of it, or diversity of
form, depends on motion. The philosophers even seem universally to
have observed this, for they said that nature was the principle of
motion and rest, and by nature they understood that by which all
corporeal things become such as they are found in experience. XXIV. What motion is, taking the term in its common use. But motion (viz., local, for I can conceive no other kind of motion,
and therefore I do not think we ought to suppose there is any other
in nature), in the ordinary sense of the term, is nothing more than
the action by which a body passes from one place to another. And
just as we have remarked above that the same thing may be said to
change and not to change place at the same time, so also we may say
that the same thing is at the same time moved and not moved. Thus,
for example, a person seated in a vessel which is setting sail,
thinks he is in motion if he look to the shore that he has left, and
consider it as fixed; but not if he regard the ship itself, among
the parts of which he preserves always the same situation. Moreover,
because we are accustomed to suppose that there is no motion without
action, and that in rest there is the cessation of action, the
person thus seated is more properly said to be at rest than in
motion, seeing he is not conscious of being in action. XXV. What motion is properly so called. But if, instead of occupying ourselves with that which has no
foundation, unless in ordinary usage, we desire to know what ought
to be understood by motion according to the truth of the thing, we
may say, in order to give it a determinate nature, that it is THE
TRANSPORTING OF ONE PART OF MATTER OR OF ONE BODY FROM THE VICINITY
OF THOSE BODIES THAT ARE IN IMMEDIATE CONTACT WITH IT, OR WHICH WE
REGARD AS AT REST, to the vicinity of other bodies. By a body as a
part of matter, I understand all that which is transferred together,
although it be perhaps composed of several parts, which in
themselves have other motions; and I say that it is the transporting
and not the force or action which transports, with the view of
showing that motion is always in the movable thing, not in that
which moves; for it seems to me that we are not accustomed to
distinguish these two things with sufficient accuracy. Farther, I
understand that it is a mode of the movable thing, and not a
substance, just as figure is a property of the thing figured, and
repose of that which is at rest. PART III. OF THE VISIBLE WORLD. I. That we cannot think too highly of the works of God. Having now ascertained certain principles of material things, which
were sought, not by the prejudices of the senses, but by the light
of reason, and which thus possess so great evidence that we cannot
doubt of their truth, it remains for us to consider whether from
these alone we can deduce the explication of all the phenomena of
nature. We will commence with those phenomena that are of the
greatest generality, and upon which the others depend, as, for
example, with the general structure of this whole visible world. But
in order to our philosophizing aright regarding this, two things are
first of all to be observed. The first is, that we should ever bear
in mind the infinity of the power and goodness of God, that we may
not fear falling into error by imagining his works to be too great,
beautiful, and perfect, but that we may, on the contrary, take care
lest, by supposing limits to them of which we have no certain
knowledge, we appear to think less highly than we ought of the power
of God. II. That we ought to beware lest, in our presumption, we imagine
that the ends which God proposed to himself in the creation of the
world are understood by us. The second is, that we should beware of presuming too highly of
ourselves, as it seems we should do if we supposed certain limits to
the world, without being assured of their existence either by
natural reasons or by divine revelation, as if the power of our
thought extended beyond what God has in reality made; but likewise
still more if we persuaded ourselves that all things were created by
God for us only, or if we merely supposed that we could comprehend
by the power of our intellect the ends which God proposed to himself
in creating the universe. III. In what sense it may be said that all things were created for
the sake of man. For although, as far as regards morals, it may be a pious thought to
believe that God made all things for us, seeing we may thus be
incited to greater gratitude and love toward him; and although it is
even in some sense true, because there is no created thing of which
we cannot make some use, if it be only that of exercising our mind
in considering it, and honouring God on account of it, it is yet by
no means probable that all things were created for us in this way
that God had no other end in their creation; and this supposition
would be plainly ridiculous and inept in physical reasoning, for we
do not doubt but that many things exist, or formerly existed and
have now ceased to be, which were never seen or known by man, and
were never of use to him. PART IV. OF THE EARTH. CLXXXVIII. Of what is to be borrowed from disquisitions on animals
and man to advance the knowledge of material objects. I should add nothing farther to this the Fourth Part of the
Principles of Philosophy, did I purpose carrying out my original
design of writing a Fifth and Sixth Part, the one treating of things
possessed of life, that is, animals and plants, and the other of
man. But because I have not yet acquired sufficient knowledge of all
the matters of which I should desire to treat in these two last
parts, and do not know whether I shall ever have sufficient leisure
to finish them, I will here subjoin a few things regarding the
objects of our senses, that I may not, for the sake of the latter,
delay too long the publication of the former parts, or of what may
be desiderated in them, which I might have reserved for explanation
in those others: for I have hitherto described this earth, and
generally the whole visible world, as if it were merely a machine in
which there was nothing at all to consider except the figures and
motions of its parts, whereas our senses present to us many other
things, for example colours, smells, sounds, and the like, of which,
if I did not speak at all, it would be thought I had omitted the
explication of the majority of the objects that are in nature. CLXXXIX. What perception (SENSUS) is, and how we perceive. We must know, therefore, that although the human soul is united to
the whole body, it has, nevertheless, its principal seat in the
brain, where alone it not only understands and imagines, but also
perceives; and this by the medium of the nerves, which are extended
like threads from the brain to all the other members, with which
they are so connected that we can hardly touch any one of them
without moving the extremities of some of the nerves spread over it;
and this motion passes to the other extremities of those nerves
which are collected in the brain round the seat of the soul,
[Footnote: *** FOOTNOTE NOT VISIBLE IN PAGE IMAGE (#98, Text p 195)]
as I have already explained with sufficient minuteness in the fourth
chapter of the Dioptrics. But the movements which are thus excited
in the brain by the nerves variously affect the soul or mind, which
is intimately conjoined with the brain, according to the diversity
of the motions themselves. And the diverse affections of the mind or
thoughts that immediately arise from these motions, are called
perceptions of the senses (SENSUUM PERCEPTIONES), or, as we commonly
speak, sensations (SENSUS). CXC. Of the distinction of the senses; and, first, of the internal,
that is, of the affections of the mind (passions), and the natural
appetites. The varieties of these sensations depend, firstly, on the diversity
of the nerves themselves, and, secondly, of the movements that are
made in each nerve. We have not, however, as many different senses
as there are nerves. We can distinguish but seven principal classes
of nerves, of which two belong to the internal, and the other five
to the external senses. The nerves which extend to the stomach, the
oesophagus, the fauces, and the other internal parts that are
subservient to our natural wants, constitute one of our internal
senses. This is called the natural appetite (APPETITUS NATURALIS). The other internal sense, which embraces all the emotions
(COMMOTIONES) of the mind or passions, and affections, as joy,
sadness, love, hate, and the like, depends upon the nerves which
extend to the heart and the parts about the heart, and are
exceedingly small; for, by way of example, when the blood happens to
be pure and well tempered, so that it dilates in the heart more
readily and strongly than usual, this so enlarges and moves the
small nerves scattered around the orifices, that there is thence a
corresponding movement in the brain, which affects the mind with a
certain natural feeling of joy; and as often as these same nerves
are moved in the same way, although this is by other causes, they
excite in our mind the same feeling (sensus, sentiment). Thus, the
imagination of the enjoyment of a good does not contain in itself
the feeling of joy, but it causes the animal spirits to pass from
the brain to the muscles in which these nerves are inserted; and
thus dilating the orifices of the heart, it also causes these small
nerves to move in the way appointed by nature to afford the
sensation of joy. Thus, when we receive news, the mind first of all
judges of it, and if the news be good, it rejoices with that
intellectual joy (GAUDIUM INTELLECTUALE) which is independent of any
emotion (COMMOTIO) of the body, and which the Stoics did not deny to
their wise man [although they supposed him exempt from all passion]. But as soon as this joy passes from the understanding to the
imagination, the spirits flow from the brain to the muscles that are
about the heart, and there excite the motion of the small nerves, by
means of which another motion is caused in the brain, which affects
the mind with the sensation of animal joy (LAETITIA ANIMALIS). On
the same principle, when the blood is so thick that it flows but
sparingly into the ventricles of the heart, and is not there
sufficiently dilated, it excites in the same nerves a motion quite
different from the preceding, which, communicated to the brain,
gives to the mind the sensation of sadness, although the mind itself
is perhaps ignorant of the cause of its sadness. And all the other
causes which move these nerves in the same way may also give to the
mind the same sensation. But the other movements of the same nerves
produce other effects, as the feelings of love, hate, fear, anger,
etc., as far as they are merely affections or passions of the mind;
in other words, as far as they are confused thoughts which the mind
has not from itself alone, but from its being closely joined to the
body, from which it receives impressions; for there is the widest
difference between these passions and the distinct thoughts which we
have of what ought to be loved, or chosen, or shunned, etc.,
[although these are often enough found together]. The natural
appetites, as hunger, thirst, and the others, are likewise
sensations excited in the mind by means of the nerves of the
stomach, fauces, and other parts, and are entirely different from
the will which we have to eat, drink, [and to do all that which we
think proper for the conservation of our body]; but, because this
will or appetition almost always accompanies them, they are
therefore named appetites. CXCI. Of the external senses; and first of touch. We commonly reckon the external senses five in number, because there
are as many different kinds of objects which move the nerves and
their organs, and an equal number of kinds of confused thoughts
excited in the soul by these emotions. In the first place, the
nerves terminating in the skin of the whole body can be touched
through this medium by any terrene objects whatever, and moved by
these wholes, in one way by their hardness, in another by their
gravity, in a third by their heat, in a fourth by their humidity,
etc.--and in as many diverse modes as they are either moved or
hindered from their ordinary motion, to that extent are diverse
sensations excited in the mind, from which a corresponding number of
tactile qualities derive their appellations. Besides this, when
these nerves are moved a little more powerfully than usual, but not
nevertheless to the degree by which our body is in any way hurt,
there thus arises a sensation of titillation, which is naturally
agreeable to the mind, because it testifies to it of the powers of
the body with which it is joined, [in that the latter can suffer the
action causing this titillation, without being hurt]. But if this
action be strong enough to hurt our body in any way, this gives to
our mind the sensation of pain. And we thus see why corporeal
pleasure and pain, although sensations of quite an opposite
character, arise nevertheless from causes nearly alike. CXCII. Of taste. In the second place, the other nerves scattered over the tongue and
the parts in its vicinity are diversely moved by the particles of
the same bodies, separated from each other and floating in the
saliva in the mouth, and thus cause sensations of diverse tastes
according to the diversity of figure in these particles. [Footnote:
In the French this section begins, "Taste, after touch the grossest
of the senses," etc.] CXCIII. Of smell. Thirdly, two nerves also or appendages of the brain, for they do not
go beyond the limits of the skull, are moved by the particles of
terrestrial bodies, separated and flying in the air, not indeed by
all particles indifferently, but by those only that are sufficiently
subtle and penetrating to enter the pores of the bone we call the
spongy, when drawn into the nostrils, and thus to reach the nerves. From the different motions of these particles arise the sensations
of the different smells. CXCIV. Of hearing. Fourthly, there are two nerves within the ears, so attached to three
small bones that are mutually sustaining, and the first of which
rests on the small membrane that covers the cavity we call the
tympanum of the ear, that all the diverse vibrations which the
surrounding air communicates to this membrane are transmitted to the
mind by these nerves, and these vibrations give rise, according to
their diversity, to the sensations of the different sounds. CXCV. Of sight. Finally, the extremities of the optic nerves, composing the coat in
the eyes called the retina, are not moved by the air nor by any
terrestrial object, but only by the globules of the second element,
whence we have the sense of light and colours: as I have already at
sufficient length explained in the Dioptrics and treatise of
Meteors. [Footnote: In the French this section begins, "Finally,
sight is the most subtle of all the senses," etc.] CXCVI. That the soul perceives only in so far as it is in the
brain. It is clearly established, however, that the soul does not perceive
in so far as it is in each member of the body, but only in so far as
it is in the brain, where the nerves by their movements convey to it
the diverse actions of the external objects that touch the parts of
the body in which they are inserted. For, in the first place, there
are various maladies, which, though they affect the brain alone, yet
bring disorder upon, or deprive us altogether of the use of, our
senses, just as sleep, which affects the brain only, and yet takes
from us daily during a great part of our time the faculty of
perception, which afterwards in our waking state is restored to us. The second proof is, that though there be no disease in the brain,
[or in the members in which the organs of the external senses are],
it is nevertheless sufficient to take away sensation from the part
of the body where the nerves terminate, if only the movement of one
of the nerves that extend from the brain to these members be
obstructed in any part of the distance that is between the two. And
the last proof is, that we sometimes feel pain as if in certain of
our members, the cause of which, however, is not in these members
where it is felt, but somewhere nearer the brain, through which the
nerves pass that give to the mind the sensation of it. I could
establish this fact by innumerable experiments; I will here,
however, merely refer to one of them. A girl suffering from a bad
ulcer in the hand, had her eyes bandaged whenever the surgeon came
to visit her, not being able to bear the sight of the dressing of
the sore; and, the gangrene having spread, after the expiry of a few
days the arm was amputated from the elbow [without the girl's
knowledge]; linen cloths tied one above the other were substituted
in place of the part amputated, so that she remained for some time
without knowing that the operation had been performed, and meanwhile
she complained of feeling various pains, sometimes in one finger of
the hand that was cut off, and sometimes in another. The only
explanation of this is, that the nerves which before stretched
downwards from the brain to the hand, and then terminated in the arm
close to the elbow, were there moved in the same way as they
required to be moved before in the hand for the purpose of
impressing on the mind residing in the brain the sensation of pain
in this or that finger. [And this clearly shows that the pain of the
hand is not felt by the mind in so far as it is in the hand, but in
so far as it is in the brain.] CXCVII. That the nature of the mind is such that from the motion
alone of body the various sensations can be excited in it. In the next place, it can be proved that our mind is of such a
nature that the motions of the body alone are sufficient to excite
in it all sorts of thoughts, without it being necessary that these
should in any way resemble the motions which give rise to them, and
especially that these motions can excite in it those confused
thoughts called sensations (SENSUS, SENSATIONES). For we see that
words, whether uttered by the voice or merely written, excite in our
minds all kinds of thoughts and emotions. On the same paper, with
the same pen and ink, by merely moving the point of the pen over the
paper in a particular way, we can trace letters that will raise in
the minds of our readers the thoughts of combats, tempests, or the
furies, and the passions of indignation and sorrow; in place of
which, if the pen be moved in another way hardly different from the
former, this slight change will cause thoughts widely different from
the above, such as those of repose, peace, pleasantness, and the
quite opposite passions of love and joy. Some one will perhaps
object that writing and speech do not immediately excite in the mind
any passions, or imaginations of things different from the letters
and sounds, but afford simply the knowledge of these, on occasion of
which the mind, understanding the signification of the words,
afterwards excites in itself the imaginations and passions that
correspond to the words. But what will be said of the sensations of
pain and titillation? The motion merely of a sword cutting a part of
our skin causes pain, [but does not on that account make us aware of
the motion or figure of the sword]. And it is certain that this
sensation of pain is not less different from the motion that causes
it, or from that of the part of our body which the sword cuts, than
are the sensations we have of colour, sound, odour, or taste. On
this ground we may conclude that our mind is of such a nature that
the motions alone of certain bodies can also easily excite in it all
the other sensations, as the motion of a sword excites in it the
sensation of pain. CXCVIII. That by our senses we know nothing of external objects
beyond their figure [or situation], magnitude, and motion. Besides, we observe no such difference between the nerves as to lead
us to judge that one set of them convey to the brain from the organs
of the external senses anything different from another, or that
anything at all reaches the brain besides the local motion of the
nerves themselves. And we see that local motion alone causes in us
not only the sensation of titillation and of pain, but also of light
and sounds. For if we receive a blow on the eye of sufficient force
to cause the vibration of the stroke to reach the retina, we see
numerous sparks of fire, which, nevertheless, are not out of our
eye; and when we stop our ear with our finger, we hear a humming
sound, the cause of which can only proceed from the agitation of the
air that is shut up within it. Finally, we frequently observe that
heat [hardness, weight], and the other sensible qualities, as far as
they are in objects, and also the forms of those bodies that are
purely material, as, for example, the forms of fire, are produced in
them by the motion of certain other bodies, and that these in their
turn likewise produce other motions in other bodies. And we can
easily conceive how the motion of one body may be caused by that of
another, and diversified by the size, figure, and situation of its
parts, but we are wholly unable to conceive how these same things
(viz., size, figure, and motion), can produce something else of a
nature entirely different from themselves, as, for example, those
substantial forms and real qualities which many philosophers suppose
to be in bodies; nor likewise can we conceive how these qualities or
forms possess force to cause motions in other bodies. But since we
know, from the nature of our soul, that the diverse motions of body
are sufficient to produce in it all the sensations which it has, and
since we learn from experience that several of its sensations are in
reality caused by such motions, while we do not discover that
anything besides these motions ever passes from the organs of the
external senses to the brain, we have reason to conclude that we in
no way likewise apprehend that in external objects, which we call
light, colour, smell, taste, sound, heat or cold, and the other
tactile qualities, or that which we call their substantial forms,
unless as the various dispositions of these objects which have the
power of moving our nerves in various ways. [Footnote: "the diverse
figures, situations, magnitudes, and motions of their parts." --
French.] CXCIX. That there is no phenomenon of nature whose explanation has
been omitted in this treatise. And thus it may be gathered, from an enumeration that is easily
made, that there is no phenomenon of nature whose explanation has
been omitted in this treatise; for beyond what is perceived by the
senses, there is nothing that can be considered a phenomenon of
nature. But leaving out of account motion, magnitude, figure, [and
the situation of the parts of each body], which I have explained as
they exist in body, we perceive nothing out of us by our senses
except light, colours, smells, tastes, sounds, and the tactile
qualities; and these I have recently shown to be nothing more, at
least so far as they are known to us, than certain dispositions of
the objects, consisting in magnitude, figure, and motion. CC. That this treatise contains no principles which are not
universally received; and that this philosophy is not new, but of
all others the most ancient and common. But I am desirous also that it should be observed that, though I
have here endeavoured to give an explanation of the whole nature of
material things, I have nevertheless made use of no principle which
was not received and approved by Aristotle, and by the other
philosophers of all ages; so that this philosophy, so far from being
new, is of all others the most ancient and common: for I have in
truth merely considered the figure, motion, and magnitude of bodies,
and examined what must follow from their mutual concourse on the
principles of mechanics, which are confirmed by certain and daily
experience. But no one ever doubted that bodies are moved, and that
they are of various sizes and figures, according to the diversity of
which their motions also vary, and that from mutual collision those
somewhat greater than others are divided into many smaller, and thus
change figure. We have experience of the truth of this, not merely
by a single sense, but by several, as touch, sight, and hearing: we
also distinctly imagine and understand it. This cannot be said of
any of the other things that fall under our senses, as colours,
sounds, and the like; for each of these affects but one of our
senses, and merely impresses upon our imagination a confused image
of itself, affording our understanding no distinct knowledge of what
it is. CCI. That sensible bodies are composed of insensible particles. But I allow many particles in each body that are perceived by none
of our senses, and this will not perhaps be approved of by those who
take the senses for the measure of the knowable. [We greatly wrong
human reason, however, as appears to me, if we suppose that it does
not go beyond the eye-sight]; for no one can doubt that there are
bodies so small as not to be perceptible by any of our senses,
provided he only consider what is each moment added to those bodies
that are being increased little by little, and what is taken from
those that are diminished in the same way. A tree increases daily,
and it is impossible to conceive how it becomes greater than it was
before, unless we at the same time conceive that some body is added
to it. But who ever observed by the senses those small bodies that
are in one day added to a tree while growing? Among the philosophers
at least, those who hold that quantity is indefinitely divisible,
ought to admit that in the division the parts may become so small as
to be wholly imperceptible. And indeed it ought not to be a matter
of surprise, that we are unable to perceive very minute bodies; for
the nerves that must be moved by objects to cause perception are not
themselves very minute, but are like small cords, being composed of
a quantity of smaller fibres, and thus the most minute bodies are
not capable of moving them. Nor do I think that any one who makes
use of his reason will deny that we philosophize with much greater
truth when we judge of what takes place in those small bodies which
are imperceptible from their minuteness only, after the analogy of
what we see occurring in those we do perceive, [and in this way
explain all that is in nature, as I have essayed to do in this
treatise], than when we give an explanation of the same things by
inventing I know not what novelties, that have no relation to the
things we actually perceive, [as first matter, substantial forms,
and all that grand array of qualities which many are in the habit of
supposing, each of which is more difficult to comprehend than all
that is professed to be explained by means of them]. CCII. That the philosophy of Democritus is not less different from
ours than from the common. [Footnote: "that of Aristotle or the
others."--French.] But it may be said that Democritus also supposed certain corpuscles
that were of various figures, sizes, and motions, from the heaping
together and mutual concourse of which all sensible bodies arose;
and, nevertheless, his mode of philosophizing is commonly rejected
by all. To this I reply that the philosophy of Democritus was never
rejected by any one, because he allowed the existence of bodies
smaller than those we perceive, and attributed to them diverse
sizes, figures, and motions, for no one can doubt that there are in
reality such, as we have already shown; but it was rejected, in the
first place, because he supposed that these corpuscles were
indivisible, on which ground I also reject it; in the second place,
because he imagined there was a vacuum about them, which I show to
be impossible; thirdly, because he attributed gravity to these
bodies, of which I deny the existence in any body, in so far as a
body is considered by itself, because it is a quality that depends
on the relations of situation and motion which several bodies bear
to each other; and, finally, because he has not explained in
particular how all things arose from the concourse of corpuscles
alone, or, if he gave this explanation with regard to a few of them,
his whole reasoning was far from being coherent, [or such as would
warrant us in extending the same explanation to the whole of
nature]. This, at least, is the verdict we must give regarding his
philosophy, if we may judge of his opinions from what has been
handed down to us in writing. I leave it to others to determine
whether the philosophy I profess possesses a valid coherency, [and
whether on its principles we can make the requisite number of
deductions; and, inasmuch as the consideration of figure, magnitude,
and motion has been admitted by Aristotle and by all the others, as
well as by Democritus, and since I reject all that the latter has
supposed, with this single exception, while I reject generally all
that has been supposed by the others, it is plain that this mode of
philosophizing has no more affinity with that of Democritus than of
any other particular sect]. CCIII. How we may arrive at the knowledge of the figures,
[magnitudes], and motions of the insensible particles of bodies. But, since I assign determinate figures, magnitudes, and motions to
the insensible particles of bodies, as if I had seen them, whereas I
admit that they do not fall under the senses, some one will perhaps
demand how I have come by my knowledge of them. [To this I reply,
that I first considered in general all the clear and distinct
notions of material things that are to be found in our
understanding, and that, finding no others except those of figures,
magnitudes, and motions, and of the rules according to which these
three things can be diversified by each other, which rules are the
principles of geometry and mechanics, I judged that all the
knowledge man can have of nature must of necessity be drawn from
this source; because all the other notions we have of sensible
things, as confused and obscure, can be of no avail in affording us
the knowledge of anything out of ourselves, but must serve rather to
impede it]. Thereupon, taking as my ground of inference the simplest
and best known of the principles that have been implanted in our
minds by nature, I considered the chief differences that could
possibly subsist between the magnitudes, and figures, and situations
of bodies insensible on account of their smallness alone, and what
sensible effects could be produced by their various modes of coming
into contact; and afterwards, when I found like effects in the
bodies that we perceive by our senses, I judged that they could have
been thus produced, especially since no other mode of explaining
them could be devised. And in this matter the example of several
bodies made by art was of great service to me: for I recognize no
difference between these and natural bodies beyond this, that the
effects of machines depend for the most part on the agency of
certain instruments, which, as they must bear some proportion to the
hands of those who make them, are always so large that their figures
and motions can be seen; in place of which, the effects of natural
bodies almost always depend upon certain organs so minute as to
escape our senses. And it is certain that all the rules of mechanics
belong also to physics, of which it is a part or species, [so that
all that is artificial is withal natural]: for it is not less
natural for a clock, made of the requisite number of wheels, to mark
the hours, than for a tree, which has sprung from this or that seed,
to produce the fruit peculiar to it. Accordingly, just as those who
are familiar with automata, when they are informed of the use of a
machine, and see some of its parts, easily infer from these the way
in which the others, that are not seen by them, are made; so from
considering the sensible effects and parts of natural bodies, I have
essayed to determine the character of their causes and insensible
parts. CCIV. That, touching the things which our senses do not perceive,
it is sufficient to explain how they can be, [and that this is all
that Aristotle has essayed]. But here some one will perhaps reply, that although I have supposed
causes which could produce all natural objects, we ought not on this
account to conclude that they were produced by these causes; for,
just as the same artisan can make two clocks, which, though they
both equally well indicate the time, and are not different in
outward appearance, have nevertheless nothing resembling in the
composition of their wheels; so doubtless the Supreme Maker of
things has an infinity of diverse means at his disposal, by each of
which he could have made all the things of this world to appear as
we see them, without it being possible for the human mind to know
which of all these means he chose to employ. I most freely concede
this; and I believe that I have done all that was required, if the
causes I have assigned are such that their effects accurately
correspond to all the phenomena of nature, without determining
whether it is by these or by others that they are actually produced. And it will be sufficient for the use of life to know the causes
thus imagined, for medicine, mechanics, and in general all the arts
to which the knowledge of physics is of service, have for their end
only those effects that are sensible, and that are accordingly to be
reckoned among the phenomena of nature. [Footnote: "have for their
end only to apply certain sensible bodies to each other in such a
way that, in the course of natural causes, certain sensible effects
may be produced; and we will be able to accomplish this quite as
well by considering the series of certain causes thus imagined,
although false, as if they were the true, since this series is
supposed similar as far as regards sensible effects."-French.] And lest it should be supposed that Aristotle did, or professed to
do, anything more than this, it ought to be remembered that he
himself expressly says, at the commencement of the seventh chapter
of the first book of the Meteorologies, that, with regard to things
which are not manifest to the senses, he thinks to adduce sufficient
reasons and demonstrations of them, if he only shows that they may
be such as he explains them. [Footnote: words in Greek]

 CCV. That nevertheless there is a moral certainty that all the
things of this world are such as has been here shown they may be. But nevertheless, that I may not wrong the truth by supposing it
less certain than it is, I will here distinguish two kinds of
certitude. The first is called moral, that is, a certainty
sufficient for the conduct of life, though, if we look to the
absolute power of God, what is morally certain may be false. [Thus,
those who never visited Rome do not doubt that it is a city of
Italy, though it might be that all from whom they got their
information were deceived]. Again, if any one, wishing to decipher a
letter written in Latin characters that are not placed in regular
order, bethinks himself of reading a B wherever an A is found, and a
C wherever there is a B, and thus of substituting in place of each
letter the one which follows it in the order of the alphabet, and if
by this means he finds that there are certain Latin words composed
of these, he will not doubt that the true meaning of the writing is
contained in these words, although he may discover this only by
conjecture, and although it is possible that the writer of it did
not arrange the letters on this principle of alphabetical order, but
on some other, and thus concealed another meaning in it: for this is
so improbable [especially when the cipher contains a number of
words] as to seem incredible. But they who observe how many things
regarding the magnet, fire, and the fabric of the whole world, are
here deduced from a very small number of principles, though they
deemed that I had taken them up at random and without grounds, will
yet perhaps acknowledge that it could hardly happen that so many
things should cohere if these principles were false. CCVI. That we possess even more than a moral certainty of it. Besides, there are some, even among natural, things which we judge
to be absolutely certain. [Absolute certainty arises when we judge
that it is impossible a thing can be otherwise than as we think it]. This certainty is founded on the metaphysical ground, that, as God
is supremely good and the source of all truth, the faculty of
distinguishing truth from error which he gave us, cannot be
fallacious so long as we use it aright, and distinctly perceive
anything by it. Of this character are the demonstrations of
mathematics, the knowledge that material things exist, and the clear
reasonings that are formed regarding them. The results I have given
in this treatise will perhaps be admitted to a place in the class of
truths that are absolutely certain, if it be considered that they
are deduced in a continuous series from the first and most
elementary principles of human knowledge; especially if it be
sufficiently understood that we can perceive no external objects
unless some local motion be caused by them in our nerves, and that
such motion cannot be caused by the fixed stars, owing to their
great distance from us, unless a motion be also produced in them and
in the whole heavens lying between them and us: for these points
being admitted, all the others, at least the more general doctrines
which I have advanced regarding the world or earth [e. g., the
fluidity of the heavens, Part III., Section XLVI. ], will appear to
be almost the only possible explanations of the phenomena they
present. CCVII. That, however, I submit all my opinions to the authority of
the church. Nevertheless, lest I should presume too far, I affirm nothing, but
submit all these my opinions to the authority of the church and the
judgment of the more sage; and I desire no one to believe anything I
may have said, unless he is constrained to admit it by the force and
evidence of reason.